ACCT 2121. Principles of Accounting I. (3) Prerequisite: sophomore standing or permission of department. Fundamental accounting principles, with emphasis on the use of financial accounting data and analysis of financial statements. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
ACCT 2122. Principles of Accounting II. (3) Prerequisite: ACCT 2121 with a grade of C or better and sophomore standing or permission of department. An introduction to managerial accounting with an emphasis on using accounting information to make decisions. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
ACCT 3311. Intermediate Financial Accounting I. (3) Prerequisites: grades of C or better in both ACCT 2122 and INFO 2130. Analysis of the financial reporting requirements of corporations with emphasis on the conceptual framework and accounting for assets. Enrollment limited to majors in the College of Business. (Fall, Summer) (Evenings)
ACCT 3312. Intermediate Financial Accounting II. (3) Prerequisite: ACCT 3311 with a grade of C or better. A continuation of ACCT 3311 with emphasis on financial reporting for liabilities and stockholders equity. Also a number of special topics including the accounting for investments and the statement of cash flows. Enrollment limited to majors in the College of Business. (Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
ACCT 3330. Managerial Cost Accounting. (3) Prerequisite: ACCT 2122. Analysis of the uses of accounting data in the planning, controlling and decision-making processes of business enterprises. Enrollment limited to majors in the College of Business. (Spring) (Evenings)
ACCT 3340. Accounting Information Systems. (3) Prerequisites: ACCT 2122 and INFO 2130. An introduction to accounting systems, with particular emphasis on internal controls and computer auditing techniques. Enrollment limited to majors in the College of Business. (Fall) (Evenings)
ACCT 3350. Introduction to Auditing. (3) Pre- or corequisites: ACCT 3311 and ACCT 3340 with a grade of C or better. This course examines the two basic areas of auditing --external and internal-- with the objective of giving students an understanding and appreciation of career opportunities in both areas. The course will examine differences and similarities of both areas of auditing with respect to ethics, standards, the audit process and reporting requirements. Enrollment limited to Accounting majors. (Fall) (Evenings)
ACCT 3380. Fraud Examination. (3) Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in ACCT 3350 or with special permission from the department. This course examines the fraud problem faced by businesses and focuses on fraud prevention and detection. The course involves the study of the different types of fraud as well as an examination of the various elements of a fraud investigation. (Spring) (Evenings)
ACCT 3400. Accounting Internship. (3) Prerequisite: Junior or Senior accounting major in good standing, with completion of ACCT 3312 with a grade of C or better. Requires permission of the department. Provides a meaningful work experience in the field of accounting. Requires a minimum of 150 hours of supervised employment, 50 hours of work per credit hour. The student works full-time during the period of internship, therefore the student should plan schedules for junior and senior years to accommodate the internship. Internship proposals may be initiated by the student or by the department. The student should consult with the department well in advance of registration to discuss available options. Proposal forms must be completed and approved prior to registration and prior to starting the internship. Report on the internship experience is required from both the student and the employer at the conclusion of the internship. Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. Cannot be repeated for credit or taken for credit at the same time or following any other internship for credit. A student who is employed when applying for an accounting internship may not earn internship credit through work for the current employer. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ACCT 3500. Cooperative Education and 49ership Experience. (0) Prerequisite: Accounting major with department approval, in conjunction with the University Career Center. Enrollment is required for students participating in a cooperative education or 49ership position during each semester they are working in a position. Participating students pay a course registration fee for transcript notation (co-op and 49ership) and receive full-time student status (co-op only). Assignments must be arranged and approved in advance. Course may be repeated; evaluation is Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory. Only open to undergraduate students; Graduate level students are encouraged to contact their academic departments to inquire about academic or industrial internship options for credit. For information, contact the University Career Center. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ACCT 3900. Current Developments in Accounting. (1-3) Prerequisite: permission of the department. A research project will be required. Topics will be selected from internal and external auditing, governmental accounting, income taxes, managerial accounting and accounting theory. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ACCT 4220. Income Tax. (3) Prerequisite: ACCT 3311 with a grade of C or better. An introduction to the Federal income tax system with emphasis on concepts and procedures applicable to all types of entities. Enrollment limited to Accounting majors. (Fall) (Evenings)
ACCT 4230. Advanced Income Tax. (3) Prerequisite: ACCT 4220 or equivalent course with a grade of C or better. An examination of advanced tax topics regarding corporations, partnerships, and individuals. In addition, estate and gift, fiduciary accounting, taxexempt entities, and retirement plans will be examined at an introductory level. (Fall, Spring)
AERO 1101. The Air Force Today. (1) Preprofessional corequisite: AERO 1101L. Survey of topics relating to the Air Force including officership, professionalism, and basic communicative skills. (Fall)
AERO 1101L. The Air Force Today. (0) Leadership Lab. (Fall)
AERO 1102. The Air Force Today. (1) Preprofessional corequisite: AERO 1102L. A continuation of AERO 1101 to include a study of organizational structure and missions of the Air Force, life on an active duty base, and the relation of other armed service components to the Air Force mission. (Spring)
AERO 1102L. The Air Force Today. (0) Leadership Lab. (Spring)
AERO 2101. Development of Air Power I. (1) Preprofessional corequisite: AERO 2101L. Examination of the development of air power from its beginnings through the Cold War emphasizing the evolution of air power concepts and doctrine. An assessment of communication skills is included. (Fall)
AERO 2101L. Development of Air Power I. (0) Leadership Lab. (Fall)
AERO 2102. Development of Air Power II. (1) Preprofessional corequisite: AERO 2102L. A continuation of AERO 2101 which examines the history of airpower from Vietnam to the present. Oral communication development is a critical element. (Spring)
AERO 2102L. Development of Air Power II. (0) Leadership Lab. (Spring)
AERO 3101. Leadership and Management. (3)  Pre-professional corequisite: AERO 3101L. Study of leadership theory and skills, and the Air Force officer's role as a leader. Includes a study of management skills and their value in the military environment. Emphasis is placed on written and oral communication. (Fall)
AERO 3101L. Leadership and Management. (0) Leadership Lab. (Fall)
AERO 3102. Defense Administration and Military Management. (3)  Pre-professional corequisite: AERO 3102L. Examination of Air Force doctrine, leadership, and ethics. Emphasis is placed on written and oral communication. (Spring)
AERO 3102L. Defense Administration and Military Management. (0) Leadership Lab. (Spring)
AERO 3201. National Security Issues in Contemporary American Society. (3)  Preprofessional corequisite: AERO 3201L. The executive-legislative matrix of our national government is developed and compared with other governmental systems. Special emphasis on the role of the emerging military leader in implementing national policy decisions, civilian control of the military, and regional security issues. (Fall)
AERO 3201L. National Security Issues in Contemporary American Society. (0) Leadership Lab. (Fall)
AERO 3202. The Defense Leader: Perspectives on Ethics and Justice. (3)  Pre-professional corequisite: AERO 3202L. Continued development of the fundamentals presented in AERO 3201 with special emphasis on the military as a profession and officership. Selected ethical and military justice scenarios are presented and discussed to prepare the student with an adequate intellectual framework for action as a professional military officer. (Spring)
AERO 3202L. The Defense Leader: Perspectives on Ethics and Justice. (0) Leadership Lab. (Spring)
AFRS 1100. Introduction to Africana Studies. (3) Interdisciplinary survey of key issues in the life and history of peoples of African descent and their interaction with other peoples and world cultures; introduction to theoretical foundations in the field of Africana Studies. (Fall, Spring)
AFRS 2050. Topics in Africana Studies. (3) Treatment of a special topic. May be repeated for credit as topics vary, with the approval of the department chair. (Fall, Spring)
AFRS 2105. Black Images in the Media in the US. (3) Cross-listed as COMM 2120. Examination of African American images projected through electronic and print media, historically and currently. (Yearly)
AFRS 2107. Global Hip Hop. (3) Cross-listed as SOCY 2107. The development and growth of Hip Hop from a US inner city Black expressive culture to a global subaltern social movement. Examines cultural production in Hip Hop in relation to the contemporary global issues that focus on the youth, subalterns, and postcolonial experiences. AFRS 2120. African American Women. (3) Crosslisted as WGST 2120. This course explores how cultural, political, historical and economic factors shape African American women’s positions and opportunities in society today. (On demand)
AFRS 2156. African Civilization. (3) Cross-listed as ANTH 2156. A survey of major cultural innovations and foundations of civilizations in ancient Africa; examination of the origins of ideas, beliefs, institutions, and practices; and the philosophical, religious, social, political and economic foundations of ancient African civilizations. Draws from a wide range of historical sources, especially archaeology, language, literary, oral traditions, and material culture. (Fall)
AFRS 2160. The African American Experience through Civil War. (3) Cross-listed as HIST 2160. Exploration of circumstances that brought Africans to the Americas and their experience during the era of slavery. Emphasis on the political, economic, and socio- cultural systems that maintained slavery in the South and constrained freedom in the North and the responses and struggles of African Americans. Topics include: slavery/slave trading to the Americas; the system of slavery in British North America; free blacks; political compromises sustaining the peculiar institution; and the impact of the Civil War and Reconstruction on the freedom, citizenship, and suffrage of African- Americans. (Fall)
AFRS 2161. The African American Experience: Civil War to Civil Rights. (3) Cross-listed as HIST 2161. Prerequisites: AFRS 1100 or AFRS 1111 for majors. Exploration of the African-American experience from the Civil War to the present and the struggle of freed slaves and free people of color in garnering the promises of emancipation and the changing status of African-Americans in American society. Interdisciplinary survey of key eras, issues, debates, and personalities in the African-American experience from 1865 to the present. It is strongly encouraged that students take AFRS 2160 before enrolling in this course. (Spring)
AFRS 2206. African Literature, Music, and Art. (3)  Survey of socio-cultural context in which African literature, music, and art function; examination of the impact of changes resulting from international dependence and improved communications across continents and cultures; parallels drawn with other regions of the world, particularly the US and Europe. Creative research or community projects required. (Yearly)
AFRS 2207. Pan-Africanism. (3) Study of the Pan- African movement; examination of historical and contemporary efforts of peoples of African descent to unite their struggles for human advancement, political independence, and equality in Africa, the US, the Caribbean, Western Europe, and Afro-Latin American. Included in the study are popular movements, leading proponents, and related organizations. (On demand)
AFRS 2208. Education and African-Americans. (3) Examination of the problems and challenges of educating African-Americans. Topics include: conceptual approaches to education; historical and contemporary overview of education for African-Americans; the impact of race and discrimination; analysis of existing curricula; and suggested models for a multi-racial and multi-cultural education. (On demand)
AFRS 2215. Black Families in the United States. (3)  Critical and comprehensive examination of the life of African-American families in the United States including the historical evolution of black families and their relationship with the political-economic structures of American society. (Yearly)
AFRS 2221. Contemporary Africa. (3) Cross-listed as HIST 2211 and INT 2101. Study of Africa from the 1880s to the present. Focus on political and socioeconomic changes and Africa's integration into the community of nations. (Yearly)
AFRS 2301. Introduction to African-American Literature. (3) Cross-listed as ENGL 2301. Prerequisite: ENGL 1101 and 1102 or 1103, or departmental permission. Survey of the major periods, texts, and issues in African-American Literature. Prerequisite to 4000 level African- American literature courses in English department. (Fall, Spring)
AFRS 3050. Topics in Africana Studies. (3) Treatment of a special topic. May be repeated for credit as topics vary, with approval of department chair. (Fall, Spring)
AFRS 3101. Perspectives on Race and Ethnicity in the US. (3) Study of values and make-up of American pluralistic society in historical and contemporary context. Focus on the understanding of African American values and the role of ethnicity and race. (On demand)
AFRS 3150. The African-American Church and Civil Rights. (3) Cross-listed as RELS 3150. Role of the African-American church in the struggle for human equality. Topics such as radical, moderate, and accommodationist leadership styles; historical development of the black church in the South; and its emergence as a foundation for modern civil rights movement. (Yearly)
AFRS 3158. Gender and African-American Literature. (3) Cross-listed as ENGL 3158. Exploration of the intersection of gender and African- American literature, focusing on either Black women writers or Black male writers, or a combination in dialogue. (Alternate years)
AFRS 3159. African-American Poetry. (3) Crosslisted as ENGL 3159. Intensive study of African- American poetry, focusing on one period or traversing several. (On demand)
AFRS 3179. African American Political Philosophy. (3) Cross-listed as POLS 3172. Prerequisite: 3000 level course on Africa from AFRS, POLS, or HIST. Analysis of competing ideologies in African American political philosophy. (On demand)
AFRS 3190. The Political Economy of the Caribbean. (3) An examination of the manifestations of Caribbean economic problems and policies and Caribbean political development from the post-war period to the present. (On demand)
AFRS 3200. Folklore of Africa and the African Diaspora. (3) A study of the relationships among African and African Diaspora folktales, folk beliefs, customs, legends, myths, proverbs, poetry, songs, performance, narratives, symbols, and social practices. Using an interdisciplinary approach, the course will identify parallel tales and verbal and performance arts in the Mother Continent and the Diaspora and also study how geographical environments and historical experiences have impacted new manifestations of African folklore. (On demand)
AFRS 3210. Black Families in the Diaspora. (3) Cross-listed as SOCY 3210 and LTAM 3110. This course is designed to acquaint students with historical and contemporary experiences of peoples of African descent in the Caribbean and Latin American countries with specific emphasis on family structure and family relationships. Includes discussion of theories, history, impact of globalization on family structure, roles of women and identity, socioeconomic status and mobility, slavery, colonialism, and capitalism. The course is designed to provide students with a better understanding of the comparative relationships and links between family structures and common life experiences among peoples of African descent in different parts of the world, with specific emphasis on the Caribbean and Latin American regions. (Yearly)
AFRS 3218. Racial Violence, Colonial Times to Present. (3) Cross-listed as HIST 3218. This course examines the ways in which African-Americans and Whites used violence both as part of struggles for liberation and freedom as well as repression from the colonial period to the present in the United States. The focus will be on broader processes of social, political, and cultural change and at efforts to build cooperation. (On demand)
AFRS 3220. The Caribbean from Slavery to Independence. (3) Cross-listed as LTAM 3220 and HIST 3180. Covering the sweep of history from European/indigenous contact, through the construction of a plantation regime based on African slave labor, and up to the present day, this class explores the spread of colonialism, the dynamics of slavery, and the tumult of abolition and national independence movements. The Caribbean Sea will be examined as a region, emphasizing the ties uniting the islands and the circum-Caribbean coasts. The region’s past – including empire and imperial conflict, racial oppression and interaction, and international contact – and its legacies will be discussed in relation to political economics, race, and contemporary culture. (On demand)
AFRS 3230. Poverty and Discrimination in African Diaspora in the Modern Era. (3) Socio-economic roots of poverty and discrimination in African America, the Caribbean, and Afro-Latin America; impact of antipoverty and anti-discrimination laws and programs. (On demand)
AFRS 3240. African Americans and the Legal Process. (3) Cross-listed as HIST 3240. This course explores the unique role law has played in the African American experience, establishing the status of persons of African descent in America. Students will investigate how the legal history of African Americans has shaped American race relations over the past 400 years by tracing the evolution of race, racism, and racial formations as a function of America’s legal system. (Yearly)
AFRS 3260. Slavery, Racism and Colonialism in the African Diaspora. (3) Cross-listed as LTAM 3260 and HIST 3190. This course is designed to explore how race and racism, slavery, and colonialism served as principal institutions and constructs shaping the experience between Africa and the emerging African Diaspora in the New World. Students will consider how the maintenance of Western social, economic, and political superiority materialized as functions of these three important historical developments. (On demand)
AFRS 3265. African Economic Development. (3) Focus on economic theories, planning, production, and resource allocation strategies, capital formation, foreign aid, and multinational corporations in Africa. (On demand)
AFRS 3270. Afro-Latin American History. (3) Crosslisted as LTAM 3270 and HIST 3181. This course explores the African Diaspora in Latin America ranging from the Caribbean Sea to the Rio de la Plata. From slavery, to fighting for freedom in the Spanish- American Wars of Independence, to forging new notions of citizenship in twentieth century Brazil, African-descended peoples have an important place in Latin America’s historical past. According special attention to regions with concentrated populations of African-descended peoples, this course reveals the vibrant history of Afro-Latin America. (Yearly)
AFRS 3278. Race in the History of Brazil. (3) Crosslisted as LTAM 3278 and HIST 3178. Examining the history of Brazil since Portuguese colonization, this course focuses on experiences, struggles, and debates revolving around questions of race and identity. The course interrogates the construction of a slave society, abolition, negotiation of freedom for slaves, and debates around national identity that attended the formation of the Brazilian republic and which have shaped the country in the 20th century. The Brazilian experience will be approached comparatively, using the United States and other areas of the African Diaspora for context. (On demand)
AFRS 3280. Blacks in Urban America. (3) Crosslisted as HIST 3280. African-Americans have been part of the urban scene since the colonizing of the Americas. The course will examine the ways in which their presence in cities has both exemplified and contradicted the understanding of both urban development and race relations in America from colonial times to the present. (On demand)
AFRS 3290. Research Methods. (3)  Prerequisite: completion of sophomore-year courses or instructor's permission. Design of a research project with emphasis on developing sound research skills and methods. (Fall)
AFRS 3692. Colloquium. (3)  Prerequisite: Permission of the instructor. A weekly colloquium; research and writing; opportunity for intellectual stimulation, critique and problem solving. Open to majors and non-majors. (On demand)
AFRS 3895. Independent Study. (1-3) Prerequisite: Permission of the department. Supervised investigation of a problem or subject in the field of Africana Studies. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
AFRS 3990. Senior Project in Africana Studies. (2- 15) Prerequisite: Completion of junior-year courses. Completion of a senior research paper on an academic topic or a community-related written project. Emphasis on mastery of academic skills and content of the field or specific discipline. (On demand)
AFRS 4000. Senior Seminar in Africana Studies. (3) Prerequisites: Completion of junior-year courses. This advanced seminar explores a wide-body of literature selected as the eminent scholarship in the field of Africana Studies. Students will read, analyze, and critique the scholarly literature of the field and prepare written assignments conceptualizing the course readings and discussions. (Spring)
AFRS 4010. African Diaspora Theory. (3) Explores the diverse conceptual and theoretical perspectives in the African Diaspora Studies, with emphasis on the dialectical relationships between social theories and the African Diaspora, especially as these relate to the issues of race, identity, gender, migrations, cultural production, and transnationalism. (Fall)
AFRS 4050. Topics in Africana Studies. (3) Treatment of a special topic. May be repeated for credit as topics vary, with the approval of the department chair. (Fall, Spring)
AFRS 4101. Modern African Literature in English. (3) Prerequisite: Junior standing. AFRS 1100 or 2206 for AFRS majors. Topics include: Traditional African and Western literary influences, the culture debate, postindependence satire, decolonization of African literature, apartheid, and women writers. (On demand)
AFRS 4105. African International Relations. (3) Cross-listed as POLS 3169. This course examines Africa’s relations with external powers (including Europe, the United States, and China), cooperation among African countries, the role of non-state actors in African conflicts, and U.S. policy toward the continent. (Yearly)
AFRS 4401. Professional Internship in Africana Studies. (3) Prerequisites: Permission of the chair of the department, restricted to juniors and seniors majoring or minoring in Africana Studies who have at least a 2.5 GPA and have completed the following courses: AFRS 1100, and up to twelve credits of other AFRS courses. Internship in wide-ranging working environments, including government establishments, private businesses, as well as not-forprofit organizations, especially those focusing on issues affecting African and African Diaspora populations. The internship provides students with experiential learning in an environment that is consistent with the student’s professional goals and growth. (Fall, Spring)
AMST 2050. Topics in American Studies. (3) An introduction to the interdisciplinary approach focusing on aspects of American culture and society. May be repeated for credit with permission of the student’s advisor as topics vary. (Fall, Spring) (Evenings)
AMST 2100. Introduction to American Indian Studies. (3) An introduction to the study of the American Indian experience through selected academic disciplines (e.g. anthropology, history, political science, religious studies) and American Indian intellectual perspectives on, and response to, these disciplines. (On demand)
AMST 3000. Seminar in American Studies. (3) (W, O) An in-depth treatment of an American topic using an interdisciplinary and writing-intensive approach. May be repeated for credit with permission of the student’s advisor as topics vary. (Fall, Spring)
AMST 3020. Seminar in American Studies. (3)  An in-depth treatment of an American topic using an interdisciplinary and writing-intensive approach. May be repeated for credit with permission of the student’s advisor as topics vary. AMST 3050. Topics in American Studies. (3) Introduction to the interdisciplinary approach, demonstrating how traditionally distinct disciplines, such as literature and history, or art and political science, interrelate and contribute to an understanding of an American topic. May be repeated for credit with permission of the student’s advisor as topics vary. (Fall, Spring) (Evenings)
AMST 3090. Topics in American Film. (3) An indepth treatment of an American film director, subject, or genre. May be repeated for credit with permission of the student’s advisor as topics vary. (Fall, Spring)
AMST 3100. Introduction to American Studies. (3) Introduction to American culture through an in-depth study of a single decade or era, such as the 1830s, 1890s, 1920s, 1950s or 1960s. Focus on how diverse social, economic, artistic, literary, philosophical, and political forces have shaped American society. Students examine the complex and multifaceted nature of American culture, both as it pertains to the specific era under study and to the present day. May be repeated for credit with permission of the student’s advisor, as decades vary. (Fall, Spring) (Evenings)
AMST 3210. Childhood in America. (3) Exploration of the changing nature of childhood in American society. Examines how social and economic developments have affected the child's position in the family, the workplace, and the school. Child-rearing philosophies and techniques from the colonial period to the present and the history of children's literature, toys, and entertainment will be studied. (On demand)
AMST 3800. Independent Study or Directed Reading in American Studies. (1-3) May be repeated once for credit, with permission of the student's advisor. (Not limited to American Studies students but should be under the supervision of an American Studies advisor or designate.) (On demand)
AMST 4050. Topics in American Studies. (3) Indepth study using an interdisciplinary approach focusing on aspects of American culture and society. May be repeated for credit with permission of the student’s advisor as topics vary. (Fall, Spring)
ANTH 1101. Introduction to Anthropology. (3) Biological and cultural evolution; archaeology; language and culture; comparative study of human social institutions such as kinship, subsistence patterns, religion, politics; methods, and theories. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
ANTH 2010. Topics in Ethnography. (3) Investigation of ethnographic regions of the world. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. Examples: Cultures of the Pacific; Cultures of the Mediterranean. (On demand)
ANTH 2050. Topics in Archaeology. (3) Specialized topics in archaeology. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. Examples: Historic Archaeology. (On demand)
ANTH 2090. Topics in Anthropology. (1-3) Specialized topics in anthropology. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. Examples: Hunters and Gatherers; Political Anthropology. (On demand)
ANTH 2111. Peoples of Africa. (3) Ethnic and linguistic diversity in Sub-Saharan Africa; ecology and culture; patterns of continuity and change in kinship, marriage, economy, social control, stratification, and religion. (On demand)
ANTH 2112. North American Indians. (3) Survey of the native peoples of America; culture at the time of European contact; major historical events and relationships; contemporary issues in Indian affairs. (On demand)
ANTH 2113. Cultures of Russia and East Europe. (3) Examination of former socialist countries of Russia and East Europe. Ideology and practice of socialism, ethnic relations, reunification, and cultural changes in gender roles, economy, religious practice, and popular culture. (Alternate years)
ANTH 2114. Indians of the Southeastern United States. (3) Study of American Indians of the Southeastern United States with emphasis on tribes of the Carolinas. Areas of investigation include pre-contact cultures, Indian-European contact relationships, history, and contemporary Southeastern Indian issues. (On demand)
ANTH 2115. Culture and Society in the Middle East. (3) Patterns of subsistence, social and political organization in North Africa and the Middle East. Changes in family and community structures, migration, gender roles, and religious outlook since the colonial period. (Alternate years)
ANTH 2116. Contemporary Latin America. (3) A survey of the people and cultures of Mexico, Central America, South America, and the Caribbean. Areas of investigation include religion, race, ethnicity, gender, kinship, social inequality, and economic development. (Yearly)
ANTH 2117. Cultures of the Caribbean. (3) Crosslisted as LTAM 2117. An introduction to society and culture in the Caribbean region. Areas of investigation include ethnicity, nationalism, family and community structure, economy, religion, and politics. (Yearly)
ANTH 2121. Comparative Family Systems. (3) Crosscultural survey of the origins and forms of the human family and interrelationships with other cultural institutions; role of the family in kinship, marriage, childrearing, sex roles, economics, political organization, and religion. (On demand)
ANTH 2122. Beliefs, Symbols and Rituals. (3) Structure and content of systems of belief and ritual; role in social life; analysis of religion, myth, magic, witchcraft, symbol systems, cult movements, and religious change. (Yearly)
ANTH 2123. Women in Cross Cultural Perspective. (3) A cross-cultural survey of the lives of women and the dynamics of gender throughout the world. Uses anthropological research to examine how gender influences evolution, social stratification, work, kinship, and perceptions of the body. (Alternate years)
ANTH 2125. Urban Anthropology. (3) Cross-cultural analysis of urban life; rise of early cities; rural-urban differences; migration; ethnicity, urban poverty; effects of urban life on kinship systems; modernization. (Alternate years)
ANTH 2126. World Population Problems. (3)  Cross-listed as SOCY 2126. An examination of various world population “problems,” such as growth, migration, fertility, and population aging, in order to learn how cultural, political, economic, and environmental factors influence and are influenced by the population structure of a given society. (On demand)
ANTH 2141. Principles of Biological Anthropology. (4) Corequisite: ANTH 2141L. Evolutionary theory; primates; primate and human evolution; population genetics; human variation, osteology; bioethics. (Fall, Spring)
ANTH 2141L. Principles of Biological Anthropology Lab. (0) Corequisite: ANTH 2141. Two hour laboratory session per week. In depth discussion and debate of assigned readings and anthropological issues presented in lecture and films; hands-on experience with human osteological material, skeletal material of living primates, and casts of major fossil primates and hominids. ANTH 2151. Introduction to Archaeology. (3) Archaeological method and theory; important archaeological sites and cultures from Old and New Worlds; ethics and public policy in archaeology. (Fall)
ANTH 2152. New World Archaeology. (3) Cross-listed as LTAM 2252. Prehistory of North America; Paleoindians, Eastern United States, Southwest, Mexico; archaeological methods and theory. (Alternate years)
ANTH 2156. African Civilization. (3) Cross-listed as AFRS 2156. A survey of major cultural innovations and foundations of civilizations in ancient Africa; examination of the origins of ideas, beliefs, institutions, and practices; and the philosophical, religious, social, political and economic foundations of ancient African civilizations. Draws from a wide range of historical sources, especially archaeology, language, literary, oral traditions, and material culture. (Fall)
ANTH 2161. Introduction to Linguistic Anthropology. (3) In-depth survey of linguistic anthropology, one of the four major sub-fields of anthropology; study of the relationship between language and culture, with a particular focus on how individual practices and societal norms intersect. (Alternate years)
ANTH 3090. Topics in Anthropology. (1-3) Prerequisite: ANTH 1101 or permission of the instructor. Examination of specialized topics in anthropology. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. Examples: Anthropological Genetics, Ecological Anthropology. (On demand)
ANTH 3101. Foundations of Anthropological Theory. (3) Prerequisites: ANTH 1101 and junior standing. History of anthropological theory; the anthropological perspective in the social sciences; current theoretical and methodological issues in anthropology; presenting anthropology through writing and speaking. (Fall)
ANTH 3111. Applied Anthropology. (3) Prerequisite: ANTH 1101 or permission of instructor. Cultural dynamics; agents and conditions promoting change; theories and methods of applied anthropology in health care, education, development, business. (Yearly)
ANTH 3112. Globalization and Culture. (3) Crosslisted as INTL 3112. This course explores the relationship between processes of globalization and cultural change. It will consider the breakdown of the connection between lived cultural experience and territorial location. Of special interest will be issues of cultural homogenization, cultural hybridization and emergent cultural identities brought about by the flows of people, ideas and objects in the contemporary world. (Yearly)
ANTH 3113. Economic Anthropology. (3) Prerequisites: ANTH 1101 or ECON 1101 or ECON 2102 or permission of the instructor. Intellectual roots of anthropological approaches to economy, formalist-substantivist debate, distribution and exchange, commodities, consumption, and material culture. (Alternate years)
ANTH 3122. Culture, Health and Disease. (3)  Relationship between cultural beliefs and practices and patterns of health and illness in human populations; role of disease in ecology and epidemiology, nutrition, cultural systems of healing, roles of patient and healer, culture and emotional states, role of religion, and magic in healing. (On demand)
ANTH 3124. Food, Nutrition and Culture. (3) Prerequisite: ANTH 1101 or permission of instructor. An examination of how food provides special insight into cultures throughout the world. Topics include the symbolic and social value of food, the social construction of taste, dietary change, food and health, cannibalism, and famine. (On demand)
ANTH 3132. Aging and Culture. (3)  Examination of the processes of aging in various cultural contexts, with emphasis on the implications for understanding aging within American society. Application of anthropological theories and methods to the study of aging. (On demand)
ANTH 3140. Forensic Anthropology. (3) Comparative human anatomy and biological anthropology applied to modern problems in the identification of human remains. Recovery, identification, and interpretation of human remains from archaeological, criminal, and disaster investigations. (On demand)
ANTH 3141. Human Evolution. (3) Prerequisite: at least sophomore standing and ANTH 2141 or its equivalent or permission of instructor. The theory and methods utilized in studying the evolutionary biology of the primates, including humans. Emphasizes the morphological and behavioral/cultural adaptations and phylogeny of fossil and living human/nonhuman primates, focusing on the fossil evidence for reconstructing the human lineage, particularly within the genus Homo. (Alternate years)
ANTH 3142. Primate Behavioral Ecology. (3) Prerequisite: ANTH 2141 or the equivalent or permission of the instructor. An examination of primate diversity, including evolution, ecology, social behavior (e.g. communication, aggression, malefemale social dynamics, mother-infant bonding, infant development, etc.), reproductive strategies and conservation of prosimians, monkeys, and apes (On demand)
ANTH 3152. Early Civilizations. (3) Prerequisite: ANTH 1101 or 2151 or permission of instructor. Great civilizations of Old and New Worlds; Mesopotamia, India, Greece, Africa, Egypt, China, Mexico, Peru; theories of cultural evolution; beginnings of complex societies; archaeological theory and method, environment, and ecology of first civilizations. (Alternate years)
ANTH 3153. Archaeological Analysis. (3) Prerequisite: ANTH 2151 or permission of the instructor. Advanced study of archaeological method and theory; analytical methods; statistics in archaeology. (On demand)
ANTH 3154. European Prehistory. (3) Prerequisite: ANTH 1101 or 2151 or permission of the instructor. Prehistory of Europe; Paleolithic, Neolithic, Bronze Age, Iron Age; archaeological methods and theory; ecology and social systems of early European cultures. (On demand)
ANTH 3155. Ancient Latin America. (3) Crosslisted as LTAM 3255. Archaeology and ethnohistory of the Aztecs, Maya, Inca, and their predecessors; includes an investigation of prehistoric urbanism, the rise and fall of complex societies, and the application of archaeological methods to complex societies. (Yearly)
ANTH 3160. Gender, Culture, and Communication. (3) Cross-listed as COMM 3150. Addresses cultural experiences of gender through communication; material covered includes cultural constructions of femininity and masculinity, cultural socialization toward gender and sexuality, gendered communication in private and public settings, popular representations of gender and sexuality in U.S. media, and language diversity based upon ethnicity, class, gender, and sexual orientation. (Alternate years)
ANTH 3222. Culture, Health and Disease. (3) Same as ANTH 3122, but not a Writing Intensive  course. (Yearly)
ANTH 3480. Internship in Anthropology. (3) Prerequisite: permission of the department. Research and/or in-service training experience in a cooperating community organization, based upon a contractual agreement between the student, department, and community organization. May be repeated for credit up to a maximum of six semester hours. Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ANTH 3482. Teaching Internship in Anthropology. (3) Prerequisite: at least junior standing and permission of the department. Teaching assistant experience in introductory anthropology. Includes conducting review sessions, lecturing, assisting faculty member with exams, and related activities. May be repeated for credit up to six hours. Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. (Fall, Spring)
ANTH 3895. Directed Individual Study. (1-4) Prerequisite: ANTH 1101 and permission of the department. Supervised investigation of specialized topics in anthropology. May be repeated for credit: up to six hours may be applied to the major. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ANTH 4090. Topics in Anthropology. (1-3) Prerequisite: ANTH 1101 or permission of instructor. Examination of specialized topics in anthropology. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. Examples: Anthropology and Globalism; Race, Culture, and Society. (On demand)
ANTH 4110. American Ethnic Cultures. (3) Prerequisite: ANTH 1101 or permission of instructor. An anthropological and ethnohistorical survey of ethnicity, persistence and cultures of the ethnic groups of America. Topics include theories of ethnicity, immigration, ethnic identity, reasons for immigration, acculturation experiences, and cultural characteristics of established and more recent ethnic groups. (Alternate years)
ANTH 4120. Intercultural Communications. (3) Prerequisite: ANTH 1101 or permission of instructor. Learning to cope with cultural differences; contrasting value systems; cross-cultural and communication styles; nonverbal communication; cultural relativity; culture and perception; ethnocentrism; cultural shock. (Alternate years)
ANTH 4122. Ethnographic Methods. (3) Prerequisites: At least 6 hours in ANTH courses or permission of the instructor. This course provides students with a basic mastery of the key methods used in cultural anthropological research. (Alternate years)
ANTH 4131. Culture, Pregnancy and Birth. (3) Cross-listed as WGST 4131. This course explores how culture shapes the experience and practice of pregnancy and birth. Some of the topics we will explore include the birthing experience, midwifery, infertility, new reproductive technologies, and surrogate motherhood. (On demand)
ANTH 4140. Field Biology of the Primates. (3) Prerequisite: at least junior standing; ANTH 2141 and ANTH 2142 or permission of instructor. The theory and methods utilized in the study of nonhuman primate behavior. This applied behavioral primatology course entails original research projects done at an appropriate zoological venue in North and South Carolina. (Summer)
ANTH 4453. Field Project in Archaeology. (1-4) Prerequisite: ANTH 1101 or 2151 and permission of the instructor. Practical experience in archaeological techniques. Students will participate in field research on an historic or prehistoric archaeological site. Research may include field reconnaissance, excavation, mapping, systematic description and analysis of cultural material, and/or other techniques appropriate to the site and research problem. May be repeated for credit as projects vary. Up to six hours of credit may be applied toward the anthropology major. Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. (Summer)
ANTH 4601. Seminar in General Anthropology. (3) (W, O) Prerequisite: ANTH 3101 and senior standing. For majors only. Synthesis and integration of subfields of anthropology with emphasis on accomplishing original research, and written and oral presentation in anthropology. (O credit will be received only after successful completion of 3101 and 4601.) (Spring)
ANTH 4615. Readings in Middle East Ethnography. (3) Seminar exploring both historically significant and recent ethnographies on selected topics. Examples include Israel/Palestine, Women in the Middle East, and Tribe, State, and Nation in the Middle East. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (On demand)
ANTH 4616. Culture and Conflict in the Amazon. (3) This course examines the development strategies Brazil has used in the Amazon and explores how these policies have affected both the environment and the various populations living in the Amazon. Topics covered include environmental degradation, human rights abuses, culture change, migration, and globalization. (On demand)
ANTH 4622. Readings in the Anthropology of Religion. (3) Seminar exploring both historically significant and recent ethnographies of religion. Examples include Islam, Religion and the Senses in the Muslim World, Shamanism, Comparative Ethnography of Religion. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (On demand)
ANTH 4701. Honors Research in Anthropology. (3) Prerequisite: Acceptance into the departmental honors program and permission of the department. Independent Honors project; proposal, literature review, and research for project to be completed in ANTH 4601. Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. ARABIC (ARBC) ARBC 1201. Elementary Arabic I. (4) For students with limited or no previous experience in Arabic. First course in a two-course sequence to develop competence in culture, speaking and writing, listening and reading comprehension in modern standard Arabic. (Fall, Spring)
ARBC 1202. Elementary Arabic II. (4) Prerequisite: ARBC 1201 or equivalent. Second course in a twocourse sequence to develop competence in culture, speaking and writing, listening and reading comprehension in modern standard Arabic. (Fall, Spring)
ARBC 2201. Intermediate Arabic I. (4) Prerequisite: ARBC 1202 or permission of the department. Continued training in grammar. Intensive practice in reading, writing, and speaking. (Fall, Spring)
ARBC 2202. Intermediate Arabic II. (4) Prerequisite: ARBC 2201 or permission of the department. Builds on skills acquired in the first semester intermediate level. Introduced advanced grammatical concepts. (Fall, Spring)
ARBC 3050. Topics in Arabic Language and Culture. (1-3)  Course may be repeated with change of topic. (On demand)
ARBC 3201. Advanced Arabic I. (3) Prerequisite: ARBC 2202 or permission of the department. Review of Arabic grammar and guided conversation on prepared topics. Emphasis on spoken Arabic. (Fall)
ARBC 3202. Advanced Arabic II. (3) Prerequisite: ARBC 3201 or permission of the department. Review of Arabic grammar and guided compositions on prepared topics. Emphasis on vocabulary, idiomatic expressions, and stylistics. (Spring)
ARCH 1101. Architecture Design Studio. (5) This course begins the architectural design sequence. The studio allows students to gain a working knowledge of important studio skills, processes and methods, and develop creative and independent thinking through two-and three-dimensional design problems. (Fall)
ARCH 1102. Architecture Design Studio. (5) This course continues the architectural design studio sequence, expanding the base of architectural skills, processes, methods, principles, and issues which affect the built environment we inhabit. Design is introduced as a conceptual discipline involving analysis, interpretation, syntheses, and transformation of the physical environment. (Spring)
ARCH 1601. Recording Observations. (2) Projects, lectures, demonstrations, and exercises are used to introduce the skill of freehand drawing. The aim is to understand drawing as a vital means to see, represent, and understand essential aspects of the visual environment. (Fall)
ARCH 1602. Components of Form. (2) Projects, lectures, demonstrations, and exercises are used to introduce the skill of freehand drawing. The aim is to understand drawing as a vital means to see, represent, and understand essential aspects of the visual environment. (Spring)
ARCH 2101. Architecture Design Studio. (5) Prerequisites: ARCH 1102 and 1602. Corequisite: ARCH 2601. Studios emphasizing the significant purposes for building; understanding the theoretical, technical and symbolic consideration of the environment relative to intervention, and intentions from behavioral information toward a comprehensive design process. (Fall)
ARCH 2102. Architectural Design Studio. (5) Prerequisites: ARCH 2101 and 2601. Studios concentrating on the development, experimentation, and understanding of the range, potential, materials, systems, and methods in the use of architectural technologies. (Spring)
ARCH 2601. Architectural Seminar. (3)  Prerequisites: ARCH 1602 and 1102. Corequisite: ARCH 2101. This seminar introduces models of design process to build judgmental capacity in the areas of function, spatial organization, culture, and landscape. Site planning is presented both as a technical demand and a formal device. Lectures, demonstrations, and design workshops are used to build skill. (Fall)
ARCH 3101. Architecture Design Studio. (5) Prerequisites: ARCH 2102. Third year design studios continue the five-year studio sequence with a focus on three areas of inquiry: tectonics - defined as the material, detail, and structure as form-generating influences; enclosure - defined as making space with regard to use and human ritual; and envelope - defined as building edge and surface in technical terms and signification. (Fall)
ARCH 3102. Architecture Design Studio. (5) Prerequisite: ARCH 3101. Continuation of ARCH 3101. The final studio in the Core Program examines the relationship of building to site and context in both environmental and social terms. Site planning, adjacency, contextualism, land and landscape, building grouping, and urban occupancy are included in projects. (Spring)
ARCH 4050. Architecture Elective – Topics. (3) Concentrated, in-depth study of selected topic. Topics vary according to faculty expertise and often include contemporary theoretical, social, technological, and design issues. (Fall, Spring)
ARCH 4101. Topical Architectural Studio. (5) Prerequisite: ARCH 3102. Various studio topics are offered with different emphasis and subject concentration to allow students to in-depth studio experiences in particular areas of study. Course may be repeated with permission. (Fall)
ARCH 4102. Topical Architectural Studio. (5) Prerequisite: ARCH 4101. Series of studio sections offered with different emphasis and subject concentration to allow students to obtain a variety of studio experiences and pursue an individual area of study. Course may be repeated with permission. (Spring)
ARCH 4103. Project Document. (6) Completion of a Project Document which provides for design research, analysis, development and synthesis (oral, written, and graphics) of a building program, site, and design premise. (Fall)
ARCH 4104. Thesis Studio. (6) Completion of a Comprehensive Architectural Project design including oral and visual presentation of design development, final project design, and refinement of Project Document (ARCH 4103). (Spring)
ARCH 4112. Professional Practice. (3) Corequisite: ARCH 4104. Learning objectives include an understanding of the practice of architecture today, its responsibilities and procedures, and emerging alternative forms of practice and roles of the architect. (Spring)
ARCH 4211. Architectural History 1. (3) Study of the theoretical, technical, and cultural background of architecture and urban design from prehistory to 1750. (Fall)
ARCH 4212. Architectural History 2. (3) Study of the theoretical, technical, and cultural background of architecture and urban design from 1750 to present. (Spring)
ARCH 4213. Architectural History Elective. (3) Prerequisite: ARCH 4212 or permission of instructor. Study of topical areas of history and theory of architecture. These courses are required for architecture majors (6 credit hours) to complement the required survey courses (ARCH 4211 and 4212) to develop in-depth research, writing, and presentation skills. May be repeated for credit as topics of course change. (Fall)
ARCH 4214. Architectural History Elective. (3) Prerequisite: ARCH 4212 or permission of instructor. Study of topical areas of history and theory of architecture. These courses are required for architecture majors (6 credit hours) to complement the required survey courses (ARCH 4211 and 4212) to develop in-depth research, writing, and presentation skills. May be repeated for credit as topics of course change. (Spring)
ARCH 4312. Architectural Materials. (3) Introduces quantitative and qualitative characteristics and physical properties of architectural materials, systems, details and processes. Topics include masonry, concrete, wood, steel, glazing, cladding, roofing and flooring materials, and assemblies. (Spring)
ARCH 4313. Structures 1. (3) Prerequisite: ARCH 4312. Introduces: 1) the fundamentals of structures including statics, strength and stability of materials, 2) structural concepts, systems, and the tracing of structural loads using basic principles, physical modeling, and theoretical and analytical methods, 3) the interrelationship between strain, stress, and stability, and the implications of tension, compression, shear, torsion, and bending. (Fall)
ARCH 4314. Structures 2. (3) Prerequisites: ARCH 4312 & 4313. This course introduces specific structural applications of wood, steel, concrete, and masonry systems commonly used in small-scale commercial/institutional buildings. Students will be introduced to the design of beams, columns, walls, joinery, and connections appropriate to each material type through theoretical, analytical, and computer simulation methods. (Spring)
ARCH 4315. Environmental Control Systems. (3) Prerequisites: ARCH 4312. Introduces: 1) qualitative and quantitative methods to assess the impact of environmental forces on thermal and luminous comfort, energy performance, and regional sustainability; 2) the interplay between climatic events, building use, and the variables that influence building systems technology; and 3) building envelope performance, and passive and mechanical systems for heating, cooling, illuminating, and ventilating. (Fall)
ARCH 4317. Building Systems Integration. (3) Introduces advanced issues related to the comprehensive integration of building technology systems commonly used in large-scale buildings including large-scale building structures, materials, environmental, mechanical, electrical, life safety, building water supply and waste, and conveying systems through case study, analytical, and simulation methods. (Fall)
ARCH 4890. Directed Independent Study. (1-3) Prerequisite: major in Architecture. This course is designed to allow students to pursue faculty-directed independent study topics not provided by other College offerings. May be repeated for credit with the approval of the college. Requires permission from chair of Instruction. (Fall, Spring)
ARSC 3000. Topics in Arts and Sciences. (3) Prerequisites: junior standing and permission of the sponsoring departments. Topics chosen from the general area of the arts and sciences in order to demonstrate relationships and interdisciplinary influences. May be repeated for credit as topics vary with permission of the student's major department. Can be used toward general degree requirements as indicated each time the course is offered. (On demand)
ARSC 3400. Non-Residential Studies. (1-15) Experience outside the University which provides an alternative learning opportunity to broaden understanding of the major and provide an introduction to various careers. All arrangements for non-residential study must be approved in advance and include a written proposal of goals, methods, duration, hours credit, and evaluation procedures. The University Career Center is available to assist students to locate appropriate work experiences. Student projects will be approved, supervised, and evaluated within the student’s major department. Grading by a faculty advisor may be on a Pass/No Credit basis, ordinarily to be taken in the Junior or Senior year. No more than 15 hours of nonresidential studies may be presented toward a degree. (Cannot be used toward general degree requirements.) Contact major department or University Career Center for information. (On demand)
ARSC 3480. Citizenship and Service Practicum. (3) (O, W) An interdisciplinary, experiential learning course which examines the relationship between citizenship and service to one’s community. Lectures, reading, and seminars explore the historical, ethical, and political foundations of voluntary service for issues such as poverty, homelessness, and social justice. Course meets for two hours of lecture/discussion per week and requires completion of 40 hours of voluntary service in the community. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ARSC 3500. Cooperative Education and 49ership Experience. (0) Prerequisites: Departmental GPA and credit hours required and approval by the departmental Co-op Coordinator in conjunction with the University Career Center. Enrollment in this course is required for Arts and Sciences students involved in professional work experiences offered through either the 49ership program, or the parallel co-op (part-time work) or the alternating co-op (fulltime work) option of the cooperative education program. Participating students pay a course registration fee for transcript notation (49ership and co-op) and receive full-time student status (co-op only). Assignments must be arranged and approved in advance. Course may be repeated; evaluation is Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory. Only open to undergraduate students; Graduate level students are encouraged to contact their academic departments to inquire about academic or industrial internship options for credit. For information, contact the University Career Center. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ARTA 2800. Directed Studies in Art. (1-3) Prerequisite: Permission of instructor and department. Directed individual research in a particular artistic field of interest not otherwise offered. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ARTA 3000. Topics in Art. (1-3) Special topic in art. May be repeated for credit with change in topic. (On demand)
ARTA 3101. Art Writing. (3)  Cross-listed as JOUR 3050. Prerequisite: Permission of instructor for non-majors. Priority for Art and Architecture majors. Intensive writing experience in the forms of writing commonly employed in the visual arts: criticism, journalism, historical research, personal essay. (On demand)
ARTA 3201. Graphic Design and Illustration BFA Portfolio Review. (1) Prerequisites: Art major status, 2.0 GPA, C or above in ARTB 1201 and ARTB 1203, and completion of ARTG 2181 or ARTL 2186, depending on concentration. Six seminar style classes provide guidance with written statements, documentation of artwork and presentation format. Guest speakers present information related to the portfolio packet and exhibition issues. Portfolio is due during the seventh week of the semester. Repeat for credit when applying to a second concentration area. Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. (Fall, Spring)
ARTA 3202. 2D BFA Portfolio Review. (1) Prerequisites: Art major status, 2.0 GPA, C or above in ARTB 1201, ARTB 1203, and completion of ARTM 2105, or ARTP 2131, or ARTR 2161, or ARTR 2162, or ARTT 2191, depending on concentration. Six seminar style classes provide guidance with written statements, documentation of artwork and presentation format. Guest speakers present information related to the portfolio packet and exhibition issues. Portfolio is due during the seventh week of the semester. Repeat for credit when applying to a second 2D concentration area. Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. (Fall, Spring)
ARTA 3203. 3D BFA Portfolio Review. (1) Prerequisites: Art major status, 2.0 GPA, C or above in ARTB 1203; and completion of ARTC 2171, or ARTC 2172, or ARTF 2151, or ARTZ 2141, depending on concentration. Six seminar style classes provide guidance with written statements, documentation of artwork and presentation format. Guest speakers present information related to the portfolio packet and exhibition issues. Portfolio is due during the seventh week of the semester. Repeat for credit when applying to a second 3D concentration area. Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. (Fall, Spring)
ARTA 3400. Internship in the Arts. (1-3) Prerequisite: Permission of sponsor and instructor. Non-salaried opportunity for students to observe, examine, and participate in the creative dynamics and procedural operations of an art organization, arts related business, professional artist’s studio, or expert craftsworker. Sponsor supervised. A three credit experience requires 120 contact hours per semester. Repeat for credit with different sponsors. Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ARTA 3402. Gallery Internship. (3) Participation in all phases of exhibition selection, preparation, and presentation in four campus galleries under supervision of campus galleries coordinator. May be repeated one time for credit. (Fall, Spring)
ARTA 3800. Independent Study in Art. (1-3) Prerequisite: permission of instructor and department. Supervised individual research of artistic problems with appropriate documentation of the results. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ARTA 3801. Visual Arts Workshop. (1-6) Prerequisite: Permission of instructor. Contracted and pre-approved arrangements for student to receive credit for visual arts workshops conducted outside the University's course offerings. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ARTA 4600. Senior Seminar. (3) (W, O) Prerequisite: Senior level art majors in either of final two semesters in art program. Seminar and intensive writing experience explores a variety of general issues in contemporary art with an emphasis on career questions faced by graduating seniors. (Fall, Spring)
ARTA 4601. BFA Senior Exhibit. (1) Prerequisites: Senior status; ARTA 3201, 3202, or 3203; and concurrently enrolled in ARTC 4972, ARTF 4952, ARTG 4982, ARTL 4981, ARTP 4933, ARTR 4963, ARTT 4992, or ARTZ 4943. BFA candidates will prepare, install, and exhibit a body of work to fulfill BFA exit requirement. Repeat for credit with change in concentration. Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. (Fall, Spring)
ARTB 1201. 2D Design. (3) Introductory studio exploring basic concepts and techniques of visual organization in two dimensions. Includes study of the formal elements and principals of composition and the interrelationship between form and content. Six contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
ARTB 1202. 3D Design. (3) A beginning studio emphasizing experimentation with design and materials as related to the exploration of form and space in three dimensions. Six contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
ARTB 1203. Drawing I. (3) Introduction to drawing involving skills and theory including perspective, proportion, rendering, and expression in a variety of media and techniques. Priority for majors. Six contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
ARTB 1205. Figure Drawing I. (3) Prerequisite: C or above in ARTB 1203. A studio course that explores strategies for drawing the human form in terms of anatomy, proportions, expression, movement, and composition with a variety of media and techniques. Six contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
ARTB 1206. Concept Studio. (3) Introduction to the breadth of contemporary art practice in a lecture/lab format. Emphasis on the generation of ideas and their integration into objects, sound, digital media, and/or performance. Four contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
ARTC 2171. Ceramics Handbuilding. (3) Introduction to handbuilt forming methods, concept development, ceramic materials, and firing procedures. Six contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
ARTC 2172. Ceramics Wheel 1. (3) Introduction to wheel forming methods and emphasis on skill development, design, glaze application, utilitarian and sculptural concepts, and basic high-fire techniques. Six contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
ARTC 3071. Topics in Ceramics. (1-3) Special topics in ceramics. May be repeated for credit with change in topic. (On demand)
ARTC 3171. Ceramic Sculpture. (3) Prerequisite: C or above in ARTC 2171. Intermediate studio emphasizing sculptural techniques, concepts, and design. Six contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
ARTC 3172. Ceramics Wheel 2. (3) Prerequisites: C or above in ARTC 2172. Continuation of ARTC 2172 emphasizing development of skills, materials, high temperature firing techniques, design concepts related to utility and sculpture. Six contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
ARTC 3273. Ceramics 3. (3) Prerequisites: Choose two of the following in sequence: C or above in ARTC 2171 and ARTC 3171 or ARTC 2172 and ARTC 3172. Intermediate development of skills and concepts. More advanced materials and firing techniques. Six contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
ARTC 3274. Ceramics 4. (3) Prerequisites: C or above in ARTC 3273 and at least one of the following: ARTA 3201, 3202, or 3203. Continuation of ARTC 3273. Six contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
ARTC 4175. Ceramics 5. (3) Prerequisites: C or above in ARTC 3274 and at least one of the following: ARTA 3201, 3202, or 3203. Advanced ceramic studio of higher level skills, concepts, and aesthetics with particular emphasis on personal expression and development of an individual clay portfolio. Six contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
ARTC 4971. Ceramics Projects 1. (3) Prerequisites: C or above in ARTC 4175 and at least one of the following: ARTA 3201, 3202, or 3203. Combination studio and seminar class. Continuation of ARTC 4175 with particular emphasis on personal expression and development of a strong individual clay portfolio. Six contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
ARTC 4972. Ceramics Projects 2. (3) Prerequisites: C or above in ARTC 4971 and at least one of the following: ARTA 3201, 3202, or 3203. Corequisite: ARTA 4601. Continuation of ARTC 4971 culminating in a body of original ceramic art in preparation for BFA Senior Exhibition. Six contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
ARTD 2139. Drawing 2. (3) Prerequisites: C or above in ARTB 1201 and ARTB 1203. Further development of perceptual skills with emphasis on conceptual issues; exploration of subject matter, meaning and content, and thematic development in a variety of black and white and color materials. Six contact hours. (Spring)
ARTD 3134. Figure & Anatomy. (3) Prerequisite: C or above in ARTB 1201 and 1205. Emphasizes the study of anatomy as it pertains to drawing. Complex drawing problems in a variety of media. Six contact hours. (On demand)
ARTD 3135. Expressive Drawing. (3) Prerequisites: C or above in ARTB 1205 and ARTD 2139. Intermediate studio exploring experimental, expressive, and conceptual approaches to drawing. Includes figurative and non-figurative representation as well as abstraction. Six contact hours. (On demand)
ARTE 2100. Introduction to Art Education. (3) Introduction to the history of art education, theories of artistic development, teaching and learning in K-12 art settings and planning lessons. A twenty-hour practicum, in which students observe art teacher behavior in schools and assist students, is a required part of the course. A grade of 'B' or better is required for admittance to art teacher licensure. Lecture. 3 contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
ARTE 2121. Developmental Art. (3) Human growth potential, creative and perceptual development, learning objectives, past and current philosophies, and psychology in art. Individual studio problems involving art elements, principles, and media. Six contact hours. For non-majors only. (Fall, Spring)
ARTE 4021. Topics in Art Education. (1-3) Special topics in art education. May be repeated for credit with change in topic. (On demand)
ARTE 4121. Elementary Art Methods. (3) Prerequisites: Formal admission to teacher licensure, passing scores on Praxis I, and ARTE 2100 with a grade of B or better. Analysis of learning themes as related to growth and development in the visual arts; organization of tools, media and materials appropriate for the elementary level; curriculum design in planning art units and lessons, evaluation and motivation techniques. Thirty-six hour internship in an elementary setting is required where the student will assist the teacher, tutor students and teach a minimum of two art lessons. Lecture/Lab. Five contact hours. (Spring)
ARTE 4122. Secondary Art Methods. (3)  Prerequisites: Passing scores on Praxis I and ARTE 2100. Analysis of learning themes as related to growth and development in the visual arts; organization of tools, media and materials appropriate for the secondary level; curriculum design in planning art units and lessons, evaluation and motivation techniques. Three-hour per week internship in a secondary setting is required where the student will assist the teacher, tutor students and teach a minimum of two art lessons. Lecture/Lab. Five contact hours. (Fall/Spring)
ARTE 4467. Student Teaching in Art. (15) Prerequisites: ARTE 2100, ARTE 4121, ARTE 4122, and approved application for student teaching; senior status; completion of professional education requirements; grades of C or better in all courses required for licensure. Corequisite: enrollment only in student teaching. A planned sequence of experiences in the student’s area of specialization conducted in an approved school setting under the supervision and coordination of a University supervisor and a cooperating teacher. The student must demonstrate the competencies identified for teaching art in an appropriate grade level setting. (Fall, Spring)
ARTF 2151. Fibers 1. (3) Introduction to the field of fibers, with exploration in constructed fibers, garment forms, and surface design, including weaving, dying, printing, and three dimensional construction techniques. Six contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
ARTF 2256. Rug Weaving. (3) Prerequisite: C or above in ARTF 2151 and ARTB 1202. Technical study including warp-faced and weft-faced rugs, pile, and flat woven surfaces. May be repeated for credit. Six contact hours. (On demand)
ARTF 2257. Mixed Media Book Arts & Papermaking. (3) An introduction to book art forms including handsewn Western Codex, Japanese binding, accordion pleats, sculptural book forms and pop-ups, etc. Students will create a portfolio of hand made papers using abaca and other fibers, and explore threedimensional paper forms. Six contact hours. (Spring)
ARTF 3051. Topics in Fibers. (1-3) Special Topics in fibers. May be repeated for credit with change in topic. (On demand)
ARTF 3352. Fibers 2: Surface Design 1. (3) Prerequisites: C or above in ARTF 2151 and ARTB 1202. Exploration of surface design techniques including batik, silkscreen, block printing and other dyeing processes combined with embellishment techniques such as embroidery and beadwork. Six contact hours. (Fall)
ARTF 3353. Fibers 3: Constructed Textiles 1. (3) Prerequisite: C or above in ARTF 3352. An exploration of traditional textile construction methods for application in the making of contemporary sculpture and installation works. Techniques covered may include weaving, twining, garment forms, plaiting, felt-making, knotting, coiling, crochet, etc. Six contact hours. (Spring)
ARTF 3354. Fibers 4: Surface Design 2. (3) Prerequisites: C or above in ARTA 3201, 3202, or 3203 and C or above in ARTF 3353. A continuation of surface design methods such as dyeing, silkscreen and block printing, shibori, marbling and other experimental methods. Fabric manipulation processes will be explored as will beading, collage, foils and stitching as mark-making. Six contact hours. (Fall)
ARTF 3355. Fibers 5: Constructed Textiles 2. (3) Prerequisites: C or above in ARTF 3354. A continuation of study and application of constructed textile methods in the making of contemporary sculptural forms and installations. Techniques may include sewing, knotting, weaving, crochet and feltmaking, etc. Six contact hours. (Spring)
ARTF 4951. Fibers Projects 1. (3) Prerequisite: C or above in ARTF 3355 and ARTA 3201, 3202, or 3203. Advanced level fiber techniques and concepts with emphasis on personal expression and development of individual fiber portfolio. Six contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
ARTF 4952. Fibers Projects 2. (3) Prerequisite: C or above in ARTF 4951. Corequisite: ARTA 4601. Emphasis on portfolio development, professional practices specific to the fiber field and preparation for Senior Exhibition. Six contact hours. (Fall,Spring)
ARTG 2180. Graphic Design Methods. (3) Introduction to the discipline of graphic design. A lecture-based course with a smaller studio component. Focus on graphic design history and the process/methodology unique to the design profession. Project assignments will coincide with lecture material, and will enable students to develop the visual problem solving skills and non-computer-hand skills needed for pursuing further study in graphic design. Four contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
ARTG 2181. Graphic Design 1. (3) Prerequisites: C or above in ARTB 1201 and ARTB 1203. Introduction to basic graphic design and visual communications principles and the history of design. Exploration of equipment, materials, techniques, and procedures. Emphasis on concept development and basic layout design skills. Six contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
ARTG 3081. Topics in Graphic Design. (1-3) Prerequisite: C or above in ARTG 2181 and permission of instructor. Special topics in graphic design. May be repeated for credit with change in topic. (On demand)
ARTG 3183. Graphic Design 2. (3) Prerequisites: C or above in ARTM 2105, ARTG 2180 and ARTG 2181. Intermediate level graphic design and visual communications problem-solving with an introduction to electronic pre-press and print production techniques. Assignments focus on research, concept evolution, designer/client relationships, and the function of the computer as a creative tool. Six contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
ARTG 3184. Typography. (3) Prerequisites: C or above in ARTG 3183 and at least one of the following: ARTA 3201, 3202, or 3203. Investigation of the principles of typography including the expressive characteristics of letterforms, the relationships between image and type, and the application of type to new forms of visual media. Six contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
ARTG 3287. Environmental Design. (3) Prerequisites: C or above in ARTG 2181 and ARTG 3183. Theory, design, and fabrication of graphic design systems for museum, corporated, educational, and other public use spaces. (On demand)
ARTG 3408. Graphic Design Internship. (3) Prerequisite: C or above in ARTA 3201; ARTG 3184; and permission of instructor, department, and sponsor (consents required prior to registration). Placement in a professional setting for observation and supervised design-related duties. This experience requires 120 contact hours per semester. Written documentation of internship required. Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ARTG 4180. Print Production. (3) Prerequisites: C or above in ARTG 3184 and at least one of the following: ARTA 3201, 3202, or 3203. Advanced level graphic design problem-solving that concentrates on the relationships between message and media, and the exploration of both digital and traditional production techniques. Topics also include project planning and scheduling, paper characteristics and selection, and the applied practice of printing as it pertains to visual communication. Six contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
ARTG 4181. Communications Design. (3) Prerequisites: C or above in ARTG 3184 and at least one of the following: ARTA 3201, 3202, or 3203. Advanced study of graphic design as applied to problems in corporate communications and advertising. Project assignments include corporate identity (branding), collateral design, and advertising campaigns for print media. Excellent research, process, design, and presentation skills required. Six contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
ARTG 4982. Graphic Design Projects. (3) Prerequisites: C or above in ARTG 4181 and at least one of the following: ARTA 3201, 3202, or 3203. Corequisite: ARTA 4601. Advanced level studio course requiring independent solving of assigned design problems focusing on self promotion and issues pertaining to design and society. Project requirements also include the creation of new portfolio pieces and/or the revision of existing work. Six contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
ARTH 1211. Art History Survey I. (3) Survey of world art from prehistory to c. 1300C.E., focusing on the functions and meanings of individual works of art, visual culture, and art history as a discipline. Lecture course. (Fall)
ARTH 1212. Art History Survey II. (3) Survey of world art from c. 1300C.E. to the close of the second World War, focusing on the functions and meanings of individual works of art, visual culture, and art history as a discipline. Lecture course. (Spring)
ARTH 2001. Topics in Art History. (3) Special Topics in art history. May be repeated for credit with change in topics. Lecture course. (On demand)
ARTH 2110. Contemporary Art History. (3) History of primary art movements, artists, and visual culture from 1940 to the present, including theoretical and historical perspectives. (Fall)
ARTH 2113. Arts of Africa, the Pacific and the Americas. (3) Prerequisite: C or above in ARTH 1212 or permission of instructor. Survey of the arts of Africa, the Pacific and the Americas with special emphasis on the religious, philosophical and political aspects of art. (On demand)
ARTH 2140. Medieval Art. (3) Prerequisite: C or above in ARTH 1211 or permission of instructor. Survey of the architecture, sculpture, stained glass, mosaics, painting, manuscript illumination, and luxury objects of Europe between the fall of the Roman Empire until the beginning of the Renaissance, both in the Byzantine Empire and the western Middle Ages. (On demand)
ARTH 2190. Art of the United States. (3) Crosslisted as AMST 2050. Prerequisite: C or above in ARTH 1212 or permission of instructor. Survey of the major artists and movements in the United States from the Colonial period through 1940. (On demand)
ARTH 3001. Topics in Art History. (1-3) Special topics in art history. May be repeated for credit with change in topic. (On demand)
ARTH 3100. Field Study in Visual Art. (3) Short, intensive summer course on contemporary art issues combining a seminar (reading, research, discussion, writing, and oral presentation) with a week-long group field trip to major museums, alternative spaces, galleries, and artists’ studios in New York City. (On demand)
ARTH 3114. Art History Methods. (3) Prerequisites: C or above in ARTH 1211, 1212, and 2110, or permission of instructor. Survey of primary methodologies, theories and research in the history of art and art criticism, including formalism; iconography; connoisseurship; biography; social history; Marxism; feminism; postmodern, and contemporary theory. (Fall)
ARTH 3115. Honors Art History Methods. (3) Prerequisites: C or above in ARTH 1211, 1212, and 2110, or permission of instructor. Survey of primary methodologies, theories and research in the history of art and art criticism, including formalism; iconography; connoisseurship; biography; social history; Marxism; feminism; postmodern, and contemporary theory. (On demand)
ARTH 3317. Maya Art. (3) Cross-listed as LTAM 3300. Prerequisite: C or above in ARTH 1211 or permission of instructor. Survey of the cultures, artistic production and architecture of the Maya from c. 250 to 800 C.E. Readings and discussions focus on Maya rulership and social structure. (Spring)
ARTH 3318. Mexica (Aztec) Art. (3) Cross-listed as LTAM 3301. Prerequisite: C or above in ARTH 1212 or permission of instructor. Survey of the cultures, artistic production and architecture of the Central Mexico region from c. 1300 to the period of European invasion in the 16th century. Readings and discussions focus on artistic traditions, daily life, and political structures. (Fall)
ARTH 3319. Andean Art. (3) Cross-listed as LTAM 3302. Prerequisite: C or above in ARTH 1212 or permission of instructor. Survey of the cultures, artistic production and architecture of the Andean region up to the period of European invasion in 1532. Readings and discussions focus on artistic traditions, cosmology, and political structures. (Spring) (Alternate years)
ARTH 3320. Ancient Egyptian & Near Eastern Art. (3) Prerequisite: C or above in ARTH 1211 or permission of instructor. Survey of the arts and architecture of the ancient Near East, Egypt, and Aegean from 3000 - 600 BCE. Readings and discussions focus on issues of ethnicity, gender, religion, and politics. (Fall) (Alternate years)
ARTH 3322. Ancient Greek Art. (3) Prerequisites: C or above in ARTH 1211 or permission of instructor. Survey of the arts and architecture of the ancient Greeks, Etruscans, and Persians from c. 800-31 B.C.E. Readings and discussions focus on issues of ethnicity, gender, religion, and politics. (Fall)
ARTH 3323. Ancient Roman Art. (3) Prerequisite: C or above in ARTH 1211. Survey of the arts and architecture of the peoples included in the Roman Empire from c. 300 B.C.E. to c. 400 C.E. Readings and discussions focus on issues of ethnicity, gender, religion, and politics. (Spring)
ARTH 3349. Gothic Art. (3) Prerequisite: C or above in ARTH 1211. Survey of the art and architecture from the 11th to the 15th centuries in France, Germany, Bohemia, Italy, and the Low Countries. (Spring) (Alternate years)
ARTH 3350. Northern Renaissance Art. (3) Prerequisite: C or above in ARTH 1212. Survey of Netherlandish and German painting, printmaking, and sculpture of the Renaissance. Readings and discussions focus on religion, patronage, and the uses of art in society. (Fall)
ARTH 3351. Italian Renaissance Art. (3) Prerequisite: C or above in ARTH 1212 or permission of instructor. Survey of major artists and issues in Italian Renaissance art and architecture. Readings and discussions focus on major centers of artistic activity, patronage, and the rise of Humanism. (On demand)
ARTH 3360. Northern Baroque Art. (3) Prerequisite: C or above in ARTH 1212 or permission of instructor. Survey of Northern European art from the 16th and 17th centuries. Readings and discussions focus on a variety of artistic genres and art’s relationship to religion and politics. (Spring) (Alternate years)
ARTH 3381. Modernism. (3) Prerequisite: C or above in ARTH 1212 or permission of instructor. This course will address the history of modern art from 1850-1950 with a special emphasis on the European avant-garde, issues of identity construction (race, gender, sexuality), and theoretical discussions of representation. (Spring) (Alternate Years)
ARTH 3393. History of Photography. (3) Prerequisite: C or above in ARTH 1212 or permission of instructor. Survey of the major events and stylistic developments in photography from 1839 to the present. (On demand)
ARTH 3394. Women in Art. (3) Cross-listed as WGST 3050. A survey of the works and words of diverse women artists from Medieval to contemporary times with special consideration of social history and art theory. This class combines lectures with discussion, tests, research, and writing. (Spring)
ARTH 3810. Independent Study in Art History. (1-3) Prerequisite: permission of instructor. Supervised individual investigation of art history topic with appropriate documentation of research results. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
ARTH 4212. Contemporary Art Theory & Criticism. (3) Prerequisites: C or above in ARTH 3114. Major ideas and writings which discuss and interpret the visual arts of the contemporary era; readings in theory and criticism from the postmodern and current periods. (On demand)
ARTH 4601. Problems in Pre-Columbian Art History. (3) (W, O) Prerequisite: C or above in ARTH 3317, ARTH 3318, or ARTH 3319 or permission of instructor. A seminar designed around a problem in Pre-Columbian Art History, requiring reading, discussion, reports, and a major paper. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (On demand)
ARTH 4603. Problems in Ancient Art History. (3) (W, O) Prerequisite: C or above in ARTH 3320, ARTH 3322, or ARTH 3323 or permission of instructor. A seminar designed around a problem in Ancient Art History, requiring reading, discussion, reports, and a major paper. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (On demand)
ARTH 4605. Problems in Renaissance Art History. (3) (W, O) Prerequisite: C or above in ARTH 3350, ARTH 3351, or ARTH 3360 or permission of instructor. A seminar designed around a problem in Renaissance Art History, requiring reading, discussion, reports, and a major paper. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (On demand)
ARTH 4609. Problems in Recent Art History. (3) (W, O) Prerequisite: C or above in ARTH 3390, ARTH 3393, or ARTH 3394 or permission of instructor. A seminar designed around a problem in Art History since 1900, requiring reading, discussion, reports, and a major paper. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (On demand)
ARTH 4700. Art History Honors Thesis. (3) Prerequisites: A grade of A in ARTH 3115 and permission of instructor. The preparation and presentation of an acceptable Honors thesis or its equivalent. The final course in a required threecourse sequence for Honors in Art History. Completion of a thesis earning a grade “C” or better meets the requirement for a 4000 level course in the major; a grade “A” is required to earn honors. (On demand)
ARTL 2186. Illustration I. (3) Prerequisites: C or above in ARTB 1201 and completed or concurrent ARTB 1205. Survey of the history of illustration and problems in a wide range of media with emphasis on the significant precedents and individuals responsible for shaping the field. Studio projects, demonstrations, and critiques contribute to visual literacy. Six contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
ARTL 3086. Topics in Illustration. (1-3) Special topics in illustration. May be repeated for credit with change in topic. (On demand)
ARTL 3186. Illustration: Media/Method. (3) Prerequisites: C or above in ARTL 2186. Pre/corequisites: ARTD 2139, 3134. Tools and techniques of illustration including preliminary sketching, photography, library, and Internet research. (Fall)
ARTL 3188. The Figure in Illustration. (3) Prerequisites: C or above in ARTD 2139 and ARTD 3134 and ARTL 2186 and at least one of the following: ARTA 3201, 3202, or 3203. Examination of memory and research techniques to draw the figure in any position or environment. Emphasis on anatomy, form, composition, and costume. Six contact hours. (Fall) (Alternate years)
ARTL 3286. Illustration Sequence/Story. (3) Prerequisites: C or above in ARTD 3134 and ARTL 2186 and at least one of the following: ARTA 3201, 3202, or 3203. Corequisites: Students who are working in the Illustration Concentration must be taking or have taken ARTD 2139. Students who are working in the Graphics Design Concentration must be taking or have taken ARTL 2186. Relationship between words and pictures. Development of a narrative pictorial approach in problems for a wide variety of markets. Single and sequential images as visual solutions. Six contact hours. (Spring)
ARTL 4981. Illustration Projects. (3) Prerequisites: C or above in ARTL 3186 and ARTL 3286 and at least one of the following: ARTA 3201, 3202, or 3203. Corequisite: ARTA 4601. Initiation and implementation of a self-designed advanced level project solving a complex artistic problem. Research in self promotion, professional practice and portfolio refinement required. Six contact hours. (Spring)
ARTM 2105. Digital Media. (3) Prerequisites: C or above in ARTB 1201 and 1203. Methods of digital and electronic production within a fine arts context, Macintosh hardware and software, an historical overview of electronic artists and artworks, and the Internet as a publishing and research tool. Six contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
ARTM 3005. Topics in Digital Media. (1-3) Prerequisites: Permission of instructor and one of the following: ARTA 3201, ARTA 3202 or ARTA 3203. Special topics in digital media and their integration with non-digital media. May be repeated for credit with change in topic. (On demand)
ARTM 3101. Digital Media II. (3) Prerequisite: A grade of C or above in ARTM 2105. Advanced methods of digital and electronic art production within the fine arts context. Six contact hours. (Fall)
ARTM 3103. Animation and Interactivity. (3) Prerequisites: C or above in ARTM 2105 and one of the following: ARTA 3201, ARTA 3202 or ARTA 3203. Emphasis on the tools, techniques, and software used in the creation of interactive multimedia and animation, especially media creation for video, the Internet, and CD-ROM. (Fall, Spring)
ARTM 3105. Video Art. (3) Prerequisite: C or above in ARTM 2105. Video as an art form, including basic techniques of video production and editing, image processing techniques, integration between video and the computer, aesthetic and performance strategies for working in a time-based medium, and survey of the history of video art. Six contact hours. (Spring)
ARTM 3205. Interactive Art and Design. (3) Prerequisites: C or above in ARTM 2105 and ARTA 3201, 3202, or 3203. Advanced work in video art, interactive design, and digital installation art. Six contact hours. (Fall)
ARTM 3405. Internship in Digital Media. (3) Prerequisites: C or above in ARTM 3103, 3105, or 3205; and permission of instructor, department, and sponsor (consents required prior to registration). Nonsalaried opportunity for students to observe, examine, and participate in the creative dynamics and procedural operations of an art organization, production house or other arts related business or expert craftsman dealing with digital media. Sponsor and faculty supervised. This experience requires 120 contact hours per semester. Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. (On demand)
ARTM 4901. Digital Media Projects 1. (3) Prerequisites: A grade of C or above in ARTM 3103 or ARTM 3105 and at least one of the following: ARTA 3201, 3202, or 3203. Digital media studio focused on producing a body of work related to an artistic problem or theme chosen and explored as visual research by the student. Six contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
ARTM 4902. Digital Media Projects 2. (3) Prerequisites: A grade of C or above in ARTM 4901 and ARTA 3201, 3202, or 3203. Corequisite: ARTA 4601. Continuation of ARTM 4901 culminating in a body of original art work in preparation for BFA Senior Exhibition. Six contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
ARTP 2131. Painting 1. (3) Prerequisite: C or above in ARTB 1201 and 1203. Beginning studio exploring basic theory and technique of painting using oil paints. Six contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
ARTP 3031. Topics in Painting. (1-3) Special topics in painting. May be repeated for credit with change in topic. (On demand)
ARTP 3131. Abstract Painting. (3) Prerequisite: C or above in ARTP 2131. Intermediate studio exploring varieties of abstraction in modern and postmodern painting practice, using acrylic and oil paints, collage, and mixed media. Six contact hours. (Fall)
ARTP 3132. Figure in Painting. (3) Prerequisites: C or above in ARTP 2131; ARTB 1205; and ARTA 3201, 3202, or 3203. Intermediate studio exploring the human form as a vehicle for artistic expression using oil and acrylic paints and mixed media. Six contact hours. (Spring)
ARTP 3161. Mixed Media. (3) Prerequisite: C or above in ARTP 2131. Intermediate studio exploring conceptual problems using color drawing media, painting, collage, and low-tech printmaking techniques. Six contact hours. (On demand)
ARTP 4931. Painting Projects 1. (3) Prerequisites: C or above in ARTP 3131, 3132, and one of the following: ARTA 3201, 3202, or 3203. Advanced studio exploring individual directions in painting and preparation for Senior Exhibition. Six contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
ARTP 4932. Painting Projects 2. (3) Prerequisite: C or above in ARTP 3161 and 4931. Advanced studio continuing exploration of individual directions in painting and preparation for Senior Exhibition. Six contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
ARTP 4933. Painting Projects 3. (3) Prerequisites: C or above in ARTP 4932 and one of the following: ARTA 3201, 3202, or 3203. Corequisite: ARTA 4601. Advanced Studio continuing exploration of individual direction(s) in painting and preparation for Senior Exhibition. Six contact hours. May be repeated for credit without exhibition. (Fall, Spring)
ARTR 2161. Print Media: Serigraphy, Relief and Mixed Media. (3) Prerequisites: C or above in ARTB 1201 and ARTB 1203. Introduction to basic digital processes including scanning, modest manipulation of photo-imagery, production of photo-transparencies and small publications, traditional serigraphic, relief and mixed media methods. Six contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
ARTR 2162. Print Media: Intaglio Methods. (3) Prerequisites: C or above in ARTB 1201 and ARTB 1203. Exploration of traditional intaglio, digital/photointaglio, and mixed media methods. Six contact hours. (Spring)
ARTR 3061. Topics in Print Media. (1-3) Special topics in print media. May be repeated for credit with change in topic. (On demand)
ARTR 3162. Print Media 3. (3) Prerequisite: C or above in ARTB 1201 and ARTB 1203. Exploration of alternative and/or traditional methods in print media including monotype, planographic, and/or digital and mixed media imagery. Six contact hours. (Fall)
ARTR 3263. Print Media 4. (3) Prerequisites: C or above in ARTR 2161, ARTR 2162, ARTR 3162 and ARTA 3201 or 3202 or 3203. Exploration of advanced methods in print media with emphasis upon idea development. Employs methodologies learned in prerequisite classes in combination with mixed media approaches. Six contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
ARTR 4961. Print Media Projects 1. (3) Prerequisites: C or above in ARTR 3263 and ARTA 3201 or 3202 or 3203. Studio exploring individual direction(s) in any method of print and combined media, and preparation for Senior Exhibition. Six contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
ARTR 4962. Print Media Projects 2. (3) Prerequisite: C or above in ARTR 4961 and ARTA 3201, 3202, or 3203. Studio exploring individual direction(s) in any method of print and combined media, and preparation for Senior Exhibition. Six contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
ARTR 4963. Print Media Projects 3. (3) Prerequisite: C or above in ARTR 4962 and ARTA 3201, 3202, or 3203. Studio exploring individual direction(s) in any method of print and combined media, and preparation for Senior Exhibition. Six contact hours. May be repeated for credit without the exhibition. (Fall, Spring)
ARTT 2191. Photographic Media I. (3) Fundamental principles, processes, and aesthetics of black and white photography. Introduction to photographic theory, operation of cameras, and basic darkroom techniques. Principles of photography as a means of personal expression. Six contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
ARTT 3091. Topics in Photography. (1-3) Prerequisite: Permission of instructor. Special topics in photography. May be repeated for credit with change in topic. Six contact hours. (On demand)
ARTT 3190. Digital Photography. (3) Prerequisite: C or above in ARTT 2191 and ARTM 2105. Exploration of the technical and aesthetic parameters unique to digital photography. Forms of input and output will be discussed along with advanced applications of Adobe Photoshop. Six contact hours. (On demand)
ARTT 3191. Camera & Light. (3) Prerequisites: C or above in ARTB 1201 and ARTT 2191. Principles and practices of small, medium or large format photography, in conjunction with available and studio lighting techniques. Emphasis on personal expression. Six contact hours. (On demand)
ARTT 3193. Alternative Photographic Media. (3) Prerequisite: C or above in ARTT 3391. Alternative silver and non-silver photographic media and aesthetics. Experimental studies in the personal and imaginative use of photographic materials. Six contact hours. (On demand)
ARTT 3195. Documentary Photography and Video. (3) Prerequisite: C or above in ARTT 2191. Examines the nature of photographic documents, considering their sociological, anthropological, and artistic qualities. Students are required to study the history and criticism of documentation and to make a document incorporating historical information and contemporary concerns. Six contact hours. (On demand)
ARTT 3391. Black & White Printing. (3) Prerequisites: C or above in ARTB 1201 and ARTT 2191 and one of the following: ARTA 3201, ARTA 3202 or ARTA 3203. Continuation of ARTT 2191 with emphasis on contemporary methods, approaches and techniques in silver printing used as a means of creative personal expression. Six contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
ARTT 3392. Color Photography 1. (3) Prerequisite: C or above in ARTB 1201 and ARTT 2191. Continuation of ARTT 2191 with emphasis on color negative printing and theory and processes used as a means of creative personal expression. Six contact hours. (On demand)
ARTT 4191. Medium & Large Format Camera. (1-3) Prerequisites: C or above in ARTT 3191 and 3391. Continuing advanced photographic studies exploring creative imaging using medium and large camera formats. Studies may be executed under daylight or studio conditions. Six contact hours. (On demand)
ARTT 4291. Advanced Photographic Media. (3) Prerequisite: C or above in ARTT 3190 and ARTT 3191 and one of the following: ARTA 3201, ARTA 3202 or ARTA 3203. Advanced use of photographic media for individual creative expression. May be repeated for credit. Six contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
ARTT 4409. Internship in Photography. (3) Prerequisites: C or above in ARTT 3191, ARTT 4291, ARTA 3202, and permission of instructor, department, and sponsor (consents required prior to registration). Non-salaried opportunity for students to observe, examine, and participate in the creative dynamics and procedural operations of photography and digital media art organizations, photographically and digital media related businesses, or museum studies. Sponsor and faculty supervised. This experience requires 120 contact hours per semester. Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ARTT 4991. Photography Projects 1. (3) Prerequisites: C or above in ARTT 3391; ARTT 4291; and ARTA 3201, 3202, or 3203. Photographic, video and digital media studio focused on producing a body of work related to an artistic problem or theme chosen and explored as visual research by the student. Six contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
ARTT 4992. Photography Projects 2. (3) Prerequisite: C or above in ARTT 4991 and ARTA 3201, 3202, or 3203. Corequisite: ARTA 4601. Continuation of ARTT 4991 and completion of a body of original art work. Six contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
ARTZ 2104. Installation Art. (3) Prerequisites: C or above in ARTB 1201 and 1202. Techniques and methods of creating Installation Art, from the generation of initial ideas, to experimentation, mockups, and final assembly. Emphasis on the historical and creative issues surrounding the nature and definition of installation art. May be repeated one time for credit. Six contact hours. (Spring)
ARTZ 2141. Sculpture 1: Construction. (3) Prerequisites: C or above in ARTB 1202 and 1203. Beginning studio exploring three-dimensional forms, concepts, and basic construction techniques utilizing wood as the primary media. Six contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
ARTZ 2146. Metalsmithing/Jewelry I. (3) Prerequisite: C or above in ARTB 1202. Beginning studio exploring three-dimensional forms, concepts and techniques utilizing non-ferrous metals in functional design. Six contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
ARTZ 3041. Topics in Sculpture. (1-3) Prerequisite: C or above in ARTB 1202. Special Topics in sculpture. May be repeated for credit with change in topic. (On demand)
ARTZ 3046. Topics in Metalsmithing/Jewelry. (1-3) Prerequisite: C or above in ARTZ 2146. Special topics in metalsmithing. May be repeated for credit with change in topic. (On demand)
ARTZ 3104. Installation Art 2. (3) Prerequisite: A grade of C or better in ARTZ 2104. Intermediate level continuation of ARTZ 2104. Emphasis is placed on personal expression, concept evolution and sitespecific works. Six contact hours. (Spring)
ARTZ 3142. Sculpture 2: Casting & Fabrication. (3) Prerequisites: C or above in ARTZ 2141. Intermediate studio continuing exploration of threedimensional forms and concepts while introducing metal casting, more advanced wood-forming processes, and basic metal-fabrication techniques. Six contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
ARTZ 3243. Sculpture 3: Additive/Subtractive/ Assemblage. (3) Prerequisites: C or above in ARTC 2171 or ARTC 2172 and ARTZ 3142. Advanced studio continuing exploration of three-dimensional forms and concepts while introducing additive/subtractive processes utilizing clay and plaster, and advanced metal-fabrication techniques. Six contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
ARTZ 3344. Sculpture 4: Public Sculpture. (3) Prerequisites: C or above in ARTZ 3243 and ARTA 3201, 3202, or 3203. Studio continuing exploration of three-dimensional forms and concepts while introducing techniques and issues related to designing, constructing and installing large scale public sculpture. Six contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
ARTZ 4941. Sculpture Projects 1. (3) Prerequisites: C or above in ARTZ 3344 and ARTA 3201, 3202, or 3203. Studio continuing exploration of individual direction(s) in sculpture in preparation for Senior Exhibition. Six contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
ARTZ 4942. Sculpture Projects 2. (3) Prerequisites: C or above in ARTZ 4941 and ARTA 3201, 3202, or 3203. Studio continuing exploration of individual direction(s) in sculpture in preparation for Senior Exhibition. Six contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
ARTZ 4943. Sculpture Projects 3. (3) Prerequisites: C or above in ARTZ 4942 and at least one of the following: ARTA 3201, 3202, or 3203. Corequisite: ARTA 4601. Studio continuing exploration of individual direction(s) in sculpture in preparation for Senior Exhibition. Six contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
ATRN 2150. Introduction to Kinesiology. (3) Crosslisted as EXER 2150. Prerequisite: Must be a PKNS major (open to all students during summer session). Introduction to the study of health fitness relative to philosophies, practices, work settings, trends, knowledge bases, skills and licensures. (Spring, Summer)
ATRN 2290. First Aid: Responding to Emergencies. (3) Cross-listed as EXER 2290. Prerequisite: PKNS major. The knowledge and skills associated with being a first responder in case of injury or sudden illness. Qualifying students may receive certifications in: Responding to Emergencies-First Aid, CPR/AED for the Professional Rescuer, Preventing Disease Transmission (Bloodborne Pathogens Training) and Automated External Defibrillator (AED). Open to all students during summer session. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ATRN 2294. Care and Prevention of Athletic Injuries. (3) Cross-listed as EXER 2294. Prerequisite or corequisite: EXER 2290 or ATRN 2290, and must be a PKNS major. Focus on the health care competencies necessary for the prevention, emergency management and acute care of athleticrelated injuries. Also provides an introduction to the role of the Certified Athletic Trainer in providing health to the physically active individual. (Spring)
ATRN 2295. Care and Prevention of Athletic Injuries Laboratory. (1) Corequisite: ATRN 2294. Focus on the psychomotor competencies and clinical proficiencies necessary for the prevention, emergency management and acute care of athletic-related injuries. (Spring)
ATRN 2298. Applied Kinesiology. (3) Cross-listed as EXER 2298. Prerequisites: a grade of C or better in BIOL 1273, BIOL 1273L, and PKNS major. The study of musculoskeletal anatomy and how it relates to normal function of the human body. (Spring)
ATRN 3099. Movement Problems/Topics. (1-6) Prerequisite: permission of instructor. Movement problems/topics chosen by the student which relate to special areas of interest. May be repeated for credit with approval of instructor. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ATRN 3260. Nutrition for the Physically Active. (3) Cross-listed as EXER 3260. Prerequisite: EXER or ATRN major. Corequisite: ATRN 3280. Introduction to principles and concepts of nutrition and how dietary practices affect health and disease. (Fall)
ATRN 3280. Foundations of Exercise Physiology. (3) Cross-listed as EXER 3280. Prerequisite: EXER or ATRN majors. Physiological foundations of programming exercise for health fitness with emphasis on acute physiological responses to bouts of exercise and chronic physiological responses and adaptations to repeated exercise and programs of exercise. (Fall)
ATRN 3281. Exercise Physiology Laboratory. (1)  Cross-listed as EXER 3281. Corequisite: EXER 3280 or ATRN 3280. Laboratory experiences and assignments to enhance the lecture material presented in ATRN 3280. One laboratory period of two hours a week or two one hour labs. (Fall)
ATRN 3286. Exercise Testing. (3) Cross-listed as EXER 3286. Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in EXER 3280 or ATRN 3280 and EXER 3281 or ATRN 3281. Corequisite: ATRN 3287. This course is designed to teach methods and protocols for collecting and interpreting information collected on individuals concerning various fitness parameters for the future development of individual and group conditioning programs. (Spring)
ATRN 3287. Exercise Testing Lab. (1)  Crosslisted as EXER 3287. Corequisite: EXER 3286 or ATRN 3286. Practitioner lab in the use of appropriate data collection methods and protocols. (Spring)
ATRN 3288. Upper Body Injury Evaluation. (3) Prerequisite: Acceptance into the Athletic Training Education Program. An upper division athletic training course focusing on orthopedic evaluation competencies for assessing athletic-related injuries and pathology to the upper extremities, cervical and thoracic spine. (Fall)
ATRN 3289. Upper Body Injury Evaluation Laboratory. (1) Corequisite: ATRN 3288. Practitioner lab focusing on the psychomotor competencies and clinical proficiencies related to upper extremity, cervical and thoracic spine injury and pathology assessment. (Fall)
ATRN 3290. Lower Body Injury Evaluation. (3) Prerequisites: Acceptance into the Athletic Training Education Program. An upper division athletic training course focusing on orthopedic evaluation competencies for assessing athletic-related injuries and pathology to the lower extremities and lumbar spine. (Fall)
ATRN 3291. Therapeutic Modalities. (3) Prerequisite: Acceptance into the Athletic Training Education Program. A study of the theories and techniques of therapeutic modalities within the scope of athletic training. (Spring)
ATRN 3292. Therapeutic Modalities Laboratory. (1) Corequisite: ATRN 3291. Practitioner lab focusing on the psychomotor competencies and clinical proficiencies related to the use of therapeutic modalities within the scope of athletic training. (Spring)
ATRN 3293. General Medical and Psychosocial Aspects of Athletic Training. (3) Prerequisites: ATRN 3288, ATRN 3289, 3290 and ATRN 3295.. Study of cognitive, psychomotor, and affective competencies and proficiencies that the entry-level certified athletic trainer must possess to recognize, treat, and refer, when appropriate, the general medical conditions, psychosocial situations, and disabilities of athletes and others involved in physical activity. (Spring)
ATRN 3295. Lower Body Injury Evaluation Laboratory. (1) Corequisite: ATRN 3290. Practitioner lab focusing on the psychomotor competencies and clinical proficiencies related to lower extremity and lumbar spine injury evaluations. (Fall)
ATRN 3298. Therapeutic Exercise Foundations. (3) Prerequisites: ATRN 3290 and ATRN 3295. Study of the theory and principles that guide the application of therapeutic exercise. (Spring)
ATRN 3400. Athletic Training Clinical I. (2) Prerequisites: Acceptance into the Athletic Training Education Program. Acquisition and application of clinical proficiencies and psychomotor competencies necessary for the entry-level athletic trainer. Students must complete approximately 20 hours of clinical experience per week at an approved athletic training clinical agency. (Fall)
ATRN 3401. Athletic Training Clinical II. (2) Prerequisite: ATRN 3400. Continuation of ATRN 3400. Students must complete approximately 20 hours of clinical experience per week at an approved athletic training clinical agency. (Spring)
ATRN 4121. Pharmacology for the Physically Active. (3) Cross-listed as EXER 4121. Prerequisite: A grade of C of better in EXER 3260 or ATRN 3260. The course entails an examination of the historical aspects of use, abuse, and addiction within the realm of healthcare and human performance. This course will expose students to a wide variety of drug issues and the unique use and abuse patterns of individuals treated in healthcare settings and physical fitness. (Fall)
ATRN 4132. Lifetime Weight Management. (3) Prerequisites or corequisites: EXER 3260 or ATRN 3260. Examines factors in obesity and weight control, emphasizing techniques in behavior modification and lifestyle change for effective weight management. (Spring)
ATRN 4286. Exercise Prescription. (3) Cross-listed as EXER 4286. Prerequisite Successful completion of EXER 3286 or ATRN 3286 and EXER 3287 or ATRN 3287. This course is designed to teach the interpretation and prescription of exercise and various fitness parameters for programs with healthy populations and general clinical populations. (Fall)
ATRN 4290. Therapeutic Exercise. (3) Prerequisite: ATRN 3298. Application of the therapeutic techniques used in rehabilitation for upper and lower body injuries within the scope of athletic training. (Fall)
ATRN 4291. Therapeutic Exercise Laboratory. (1) Corequisite: ATRN 4290. Practitioner lab focusing on the psychomotor competencies and clinical proficiencies related to the use of therapeutic exercise within the scope of athletic training. (Fall)
ATRN 4292. Organization and Administration of Athletic Training. (3)   Prerequisites: ATRN 4290, ATRN 4291. Athletic training organization and administration. (Spring)
ATRN 4293. Biomechanics. (3) Cross-listed as EXER 4293. Prerequisites: a grade of C or better in EXER 3280 or ATRN 3280. Corequisite: ATRN 4294. This course provides an introduction to the study of physics principles as they govern human movement, as well as understanding how the neuromuscular system controls human movement. Additionally, this course covers the mechanical principles that underlie musculoskeletal injury, as well as the influence that gender and ethnicity may have on various musculoskeletal pathologies. (Fall)
ATRN 4294. Biomechanics Lab. (1)  Cross-listed as EXER 4294. Corequisite: ATRN 4293. Laboratory experiences and assignments to enhance the lecture material presented in ATRN 4293. One laboratory period of two hours a week or two one hour labs. (On demand)
ATRN 4400. Athletic Training Clinical III. (2) Prerequisite: ATRN 3401. Acquisition and application of advanced clinical proficiencies and psychomotor competencies necessary for the entry-level athletic trainer. Students must complete approximately 20 hours of clinical experience per week at an approved athletic training clinical agency. (Fall)
ATRN 4401. Athletic Training Clinical IV. (2) Prerequisite: ATRN 4400. Continuation of ATRN 4400. Students must complete approximately 20 hours of clinical experience per week at an approved athletic training clinical agency. (Spring)
ATRN 4660. Practitioner Seminar. (3) (W, O) Prerequisites: Must be taken during the term closest to internship ATRN 4401). Emphasis is on state of the art health enhancement practices. (Spring)
BIOL 1000. Special Topics in Biology. (1-4) Prerequisites: vary with course. Special topics for nonmajors in Biology. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. Lecture hours and laboratory hours vary by courses taught. (On demand)
BIOL 1110. Principles of Biology I. (3) Introduction to biology for non-majors. Fundamental principles of life with a human emphasis. Not accepted toward the major in Biology. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
BIOL 1110L. Principles of Biology I Laboratory. (1) Prerequisite or corequisite: BIOL 1110. One laboratory period of three hours a week. Not accepted toward the major in Biology. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
BIOL 1115. Principles of Biology II. (3) Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in BIOL 1110 or permission of instructor. Continuation of BIOL 1110 for nonmajors. Fundamental principles of life with a human emphasis. (Spring)
BIOL 1259. Bacteriology. (3) Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in CHEM 1203 or 1251. Basic physiology of bacteria, fungi, protozoa, and viruses, with emphasis on host-parasite interaction and control and epidemiology of infectious diseases. Not accepted toward the major in Biology. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
BIOL 1259L. Bacteriology Laboratory. (1) Prerequisite or corequisite: BIOL 1259. One laboratory period of three hours a week. Not accepted toward the major in Biology. Attendance mandatory for safety training. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
BIOL 1273. Human Anatomy and Physiology. (3) Prerequisites: a grade of C or better in CHEM 1203 or 1251. Fundamentals of the anatomy and physiology of the human body. Not accepted toward the major in Biology. (Fall, Summer)
BIOL 1273L. Human Anatomy and Physiology Laboratory. (1) Prerequisite or corequisite: BIOL 1273. One laboratory period of three hours a week. Not accepted toward the major in Biology. (Fall, Summer)
BIOL 1274. Human Anatomy and Physiology II. (3) Prerequisite: A grade of C or better in BIOL 1273. Continuation of BIOL 1273. Not accepted toward the major in Biology. (Spring, Summer)
BIOL 1274L. Human Anatomy and Physiology Laboratory II. (1) Prerequisite or corequisite: BIOL 1274. One laboratory period of three hours a week. Not accepted toward the major in Biology. (Spring, Summer)
BIOL 2000. Special Topics in Biology. (1-4) Prerequisites: vary with course. Special introductory topics for biology majors. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. Lecture hours and laboratory hours will vary with the courses taught. (On demand)
BIOL 2120. General Biology I. (3) Origin and early evolution of life, basic principles of chemistry, cell biology, and genetics. Three lecture periods per week. (Fall, Summer)
BIOL 2130. General Biology II. (3) Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in BIOL 2120. Corequisite: BIOL 2130L. Ecology, evolution, biodiversity, plant and animal structure and function. Three lecture periods per week. (Spring, Summer)
BIOL 2130L. General Biology II Laboratory. (2) Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in BIOL 2120. Co- or prerequisite: BIOL 2130. Population ecology, evolution, phylogenetics, invertebrate biology, animal and plant physiology. One three-hour laboratory period and linked laboratory lecture per week. (Spring)
BIOL 3000. Special Topics in Biology. (1-4)  Prerequisite: vary with course. Special topics for intermediate level majors in Biology. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. Lecture hours and laboratory hours will vary with the courses taught. (On demand)
BIOL 3111. Cell Biology. (3) Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in BIOL 2130 and 2130L. Prerequisite or corequisite: CHEM 2130 or 2131 and CHEM 2131L. Structure and function of cells. Biomolecular structures and their interactions including membranes, proteins and nucleic acids. (Fall, Spring)
BIOL 3111L. Cell Biology Laboratory. (1)  Prerequisite or corequisite: BIOL 3111. One laboratory period of three hours a week. (Fall, Spring)
BIOL 3144. Ecology. (3) Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in BIOL 2130. Prerequisite or corequisite: CHEM 2130 or 2131. Interrelationships of organisms and their environment. (Fall, Spring)
BIOL 3144L. Ecology Laboratory. (1)  Prerequisite or corequisite: BIOL 3144. One laboratory period of three hours a week. (Fall, Spring)
BIOL 3161. Introduction to Biotechnology. (3) An overview of basic molecular biology, techniques, and uses of biotechnology tools in environmental and biomedical fields. Three lecture hours per week. (Spring)
BIOL 3166. Genetics. (3) Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in BIOL 2130 and 3111. Prerequisite (a grade of C or better in) or corequisite: CHEM 2130 or 2131. Basic concepts of heredity; principles of classical, molecular, and population genetics. (Fall, Spring)
BIOL 3166L. Genetics Laboratory. (1)  Prerequisite or corequisite: BIOL 3166. One laboratory period of three hours a week. (Fall, Spring)
BIOL 3202. Horticulture. (3)  Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in BIOL 2130. Principles of horticulture, greenhouse management, environmental factors, production, and maintenance of cultivars, and landscaping. (Fall)
BIOL 3202L. Horticulture Laboratory. (1) Prerequisite or corequisite: BIOL 3202. Greenhouse work, plant identification, and field trips. One laboratory period of three hours a week. (Fall)
BIOL 3215. Economic Botany. (3)  Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in BIOL 2130. Origins of agricultural plants; history of use and misuse of plants by humans; consideration of major groups of crop, spice, medicinal, and drug plants. (Spring)
BIOL 3222. General Botany. (3) Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in BIOL 2130. Morphology, physiology, reproduction, phylogeny, and ecology of plants. Students may not receive credit for both BIOL 1222 and BIOL 3222. (On demand)
BIOL 3222L. General Botany Laboratory. (1) Corequisite or prerequisite: BIOL 3222. One laboratory period of three hours a week. Students may not receive credit for both BIOL 1222L and BIOL 3222L. (On demand)
BIOL 3229. Field Botany. (3) Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in BIOL 2130 and permission of department. A field course stressing identification, classification and habitat of the vascular plants, particularly of the Piedmont, but also including the Coastal Plain and the mountains of North Carolina. Six hours a day for 10 days. (Summer)
BIOL 3231. Invertebrate Zoology. (4) Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in BIOL 2130. Taxonomy, anatomy, physiology, and life histories of selected invertebrates. Three lecture hours and one laboratory period of three hours a week. (On demand)
BIOL 3233. Vertebrate Zoology. (4) Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in BIOL 2130. Taxonomy, anatomy, physiology, and life histories of vertebrates. Three lecture hours and one laboratory period of three hours a week. (Fall)
BIOL 3234. Field Entomology. (3) Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in BIOL 2130 or permission of department. A field course stressing identification and ecology of insects of the Piedmont of North Carolina. Six hours a day for 10 days. (Summer)
BIOL 3235. The Biology of Insects. (3) Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in BIOL 2130. or permission of department. The anatomy, physiology, development, behavior, ecology, and medical and economic importance of insects. (On demand)
BIOL 3236. General Zoology. (3) Prerequisites: a grade of C or better in BIOL 2130. The morphology, function, development, phylogeny, and ecology of the principal invertebrate and vertebrate types. Credit cannot be received for both BIOL 1233 and BIOL 3236. (On demand)
BIOL 3236L. General Zoology Laboratory. (1) Prerequisite or corequisite: BIOL 3236. One laboratory period of three hours a week. Credit cannot be received for both BIOL 1233L and BIOL 3236L. (On demand)
BIOL 3271. Cellular Neuroscience. (3) Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in BIOL 2130 (Biology majors), PSYC 3113 (Psychology majors) or permission of department. Physiology and biophysics of neurons synapses and principles of neural development and neural plasticity. (On demand)
BIOL 3271L. Neuroscience Laboratory. (1) Prerequisite or corequisite: BIOL 3271. Principles of excitability and synaptic function; neuroanatomy; neural system functions, and behavior investigated non-invasive experimentation with humans and animals. (On demand)
BIOL 3272. Plant Physiology. (3) Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in BIOL 2130. Prerequisite or corequisite: CHEM 2130 or 2131. Metabolic and physiological processes of plants and conditions which affect or regulate these processes. (On demand)
BIOL 3272L. Plant Physiology Laboratory. (1) Prerequisite or corequisite: BIOL 3272. One laboratory period of three hours a week. (On demand)
BIOL 3273. Animal Physiology. (3) Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in BIOL 2130, BIOL 3111. Prerequisite or corequisite: CHEM 2130 or 2131. Fundamental control mechanisms that operate to maintain the homeostatic state. BIOL 3273L. Animal Physiology Laboratory. (1)  Prerequisite or corequisite: BIOL 3273. One laboratory period of three hours a week. (Fall, Spring)
BIOL 3274. Systems Neuroscience. (3) Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in BIOL 2130 (Biology majors), PSYC 3113 (Psychology majors) or equivalent. Review of neuron excitability and synaptic function; physiology of the main functional systems: sensory, motor, homeostatic/affective, and gnostic; systemlevel origins of learning, memory, and consciousness. (On demand)
BIOL 3405. Internship in Community Education and Service. (1-3) Prerequisites: junior standing, acceptance into program and approval of department. A project-oriented, service-learning internship with a community organization. Maximum credit toward major is two hours for B.A. and three hours for B.S. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
BIOL 3500. Biology Cooperative Education and 49ership Experience. (0) Prerequisite: approval by the department and the University Career Center. Required of students participating in the 49ership or Cooperative Education Program during the semesters in which they are working. Participating students pay a course registration fee for transcript notation (49ership and coop) and receive full-time student status (co-op only). Assignments must be arranged and approved in advance. Course may be repeated; evaluation is Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory. Only open to undergraduate students; Graduate level students are encouraged to contact their academic departments to inquire about academic or industrial internship options for credit. For more information, contact the University Career Center. (Fall, Spring)
BIOL 3800. Tutorial in Biology. (1-4) Prerequisite: Permission of department. Enables junior and senior biology majors to engage in directed study in their fields of interest. Maximum credit toward major: one hour for B.A.; two hours for B.S. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
BIOL 3900. Undergraduate Research. (1-4) Prerequisite: Permission of the department. Enables junior and senior biology majors to initiate research projects in their respective fields of interest. Maximum credit toward major: two hours for B.A.; three hours for B.S. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. Three credit hours of BIOL 3900 may count as one biology lab credit. May substitute for only one lab. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
BIOL 4000. Special Topics in Biology. (1-4) Prerequisites and credit hours vary with topics. Special topics for advanced undergraduates. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. Lecture hours and laboratory hours will vary with the courses taught. (Fall, Spring)
BIOL 4111. Evolution. (3) Prerequisites: a grade of C or better in BIOL 3166. Theories of evolution and forces which affect gene frequencies. (Fall)
BIOL 4121. Biometry. (4) Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in one course in statistics. Design and analysis of experiments. Three lecture hours and one laboratory period of three hours a week. (Spring)
BIOL 4144. Advanced Ecology. (4)  Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in BIOL 3144. Energy flow, nutrient cycles, community structure, population growth, and regulation. Three lecture hours and one laboratory period of three hours a week. (On demand)
BIOL 4149. Limnology and Oceanography. (4) Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in BIOL 2130. Geological, physical, chemical, and biological aspects of lakes, streams, estuaries and oceans. Three lecture hours and one laboratory period of three hours a week. (On demand)
BIOL 4162. Environmental Biotechnology I. (3) Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in BIOL 3161 or BIOL 3199. Applications of biotechnology to solve real-world environmental civil-engineering problems working in interdisciplinary teams. Three lecture hours per week. (On demand)
BIOL 4163. Environmental Biotechnology II. (3) Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in BIOL 3161 or BIOL 3199 and permission of instructor. Applying biotechnology in the laboratory to solve real-world environmental civil-engineering problems working in teams. One laboratory period and two lecture hours per week. (On demand)
BIOL 4167. Medical Genetics. (3) Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in BIOL 3166. Detection of and insight into intrauterine, chromosomal, genetic, and molecular abnormalities. (On demand)
BIOL 4168. Recombinant DNA Techniques. (4) Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in BIOL 3166 or CHEM 4165 and permission of the instructor. Modern molecular biological methods (such as DNA cloning, gel electrophoresis, nucleic acid hybridization, PCR, and DNA sequencing) data analysis and interpretation. Two lecture hour and two laboratory periods of three hours a week. (On demand)
BIOL 4171. Cell Physiology. (3) Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in BIOL 3111. The fundamental physiochemical properties of cells. (On demand)
BIOL 4184. Plant Biotechnology. (3) Prerequisites: a grade of C or better in BIOL 3111, 3166 and CHEM 2132 or permission of department. A laboratory-oriented course designed to integrate plant molecular biology, recombinant DNA technology, and plant cell and tissue culture. One lecture hour and two laboratory periods of three hours a week. (On demand)
BIOL 4189. Mechanisms in Development. (3) Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in BIOL 4283 or permission of the department. Cellular and molecular bases of differentiation; an exploration of the experimental analysis of causal and controlling factors in development. (On demand)
BIOL 4199. Molecular Biology. (3) Prerequisites: a grade of C or better in BIOL 3111, 3166 and CHEM 2132. Structural and functional interaction of nucleic acids and proteins in the replication, transcription, and translation of genetic material. (Spring)
BIOL 4205. Advanced Horticulture. (3) Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in BIOL 3202. Topics in ornamental horticulture and landscaping, including greenhouse projects and field trips. Two lecture hours and three hours of lab a week. (On demand)
BIOL 4223. Mycology. (3)  Prerequisites: a grade of C or better in BIOL 2130; Permission of department for graduate credit. Morphology, life cycles, ecology, taxonomy, medical importance, and economic significance of the fungi and organisms historically aligned with the fungi. (On demand)
BIOL 4223L. Mycology Laboratory. (1) Prerequisite or corequisite: a grade of C or better in BIOL 4223; Permission of department for graduate credit. One laboratory period of three hours a week. (On demand)
BIOL 4229. Dendrology. (4) Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in BIOL 3229. The identification, structure, function, ecology, reproduction, and evolutionary relationships of woody plants. Three lecture hours and one three-hour lab a week. (On demand)
BIOL 4233. Parasitology. (3) Prerequisites: a grade of C or better in BIOL 2130. Morphology, life cycles, ecology, taxonomy, and medical and economic importance of parasites. Three lecture hours a week. (On demand)
BIOL 4233L. Parasitology Laboratory. (1) Prerequisite or corequisite: BIOL 4233. One laboratory period of three hours a week. (On demand)
BIOL 4234. Wildlife Biology. (3)  Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in BIOL 3144. Concepts, principles and techniques of wildlife biology. Value, demography, management, and conservation. (On demand)
BIOL 4234L. Wildlife Biology Laboratory. (1) Lab is required. One laboratory period of three hours a week plus field trips. (On demand)
BIOL 4235. Mammalogy. (4) Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in BIOL 3233 or 4293. Taxonomy, anatomy, physiology, and life histories of the mammals. Three lecture hours and one laboratory period of three hours a week. (Fall)
BIOL 4242. The Biology of Birds. (3) Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in BIOL 3144 or permission of department. Overview of general avian biology, including taxonomy and anatomy, but concentrating on behavior, ecology and conservation of birds. Focus will be on birds of the southeastern U.S. Three lecture hours and one laboratory period of three hours per week. (Spring)
BIOL 4242L. The Biology of Birds Lab. (1) Meets for one three-hour period per week (Spring). The laboratory and field portion of the Biology of Birds will focus on field identification and inventory techniques, with an introduction to anatomy. Students will need binoculars. (Spring)
BIOL 4243. Animal Behavior. (3) Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in BIOL 2130. An ethological approach to how animals respond to their environment. Causation, development, and adaptive significance of behavior in social systems. (Fall)
BIOL 4243L. Animal Behavior Laboratory. (1) Prerequisite or corequisite: BIOL 4243. One laboratory period of three hours a week. (Fall)
BIOL 4244. Conservation Biology. (3)  Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in BIOL 3144. Conservation values, extinction rates, genetic diversity, demography, habitat fragmentation, reserve management, ecological restoration. (On demand)
BIOL 4244L. Conservation Biology Laboratory. (1) Prerequisite or corequisite: BIOL 4244. One laboratory period of three hours a week plus field trips. (On demand)
BIOL 4250. Microbiology. (3) Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in BIOL 3111. Morphology, physiology, pathogenicity, metabolism, and ecology of bacteria, viruses, protozoa, and fungi. Aquatic, dairy, and food microbiology. (Fall, Spring)
BIOL 4250L. Microbiology Laboratory. (1)  Prerequisite or corequisite: BIOL 4250. One laboratory period of three hours a week. Attendance mandatory for safety training. (Fall, Spring)
BIOL 4251. Immunology. (3) Prerequisites: a grade of C or better in BIOL 3166. Cellular, molecular and genetic basis for immunity; physical chemistry of antigens and antibodies and their interactions; defense mechanisms. (Spring)
BIOL 4251L. Immunology Laboratory. (1) Prerequisite or corequisite: a grade of C or better in BIOL 4251. One laboratory period of three hours a week. (On demand)
BIOL 4253. Marine Microbiology. (4) Prerequisites: a grade of C or better in BIOL 4250 and 4250L. Bacteria, fungi and viruses of marine origin, and their response to the salt, temperature, pressure and nutrient environment of the ocean. Roles of marine microorganisms in public health, pollution and fouling. Three lecture hours and one laboratory period of three hours a week. (On demand)
BIOL 4254. Epidemiology. (3) Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in BIOL 1259 or 4250. History and practices of epidemiology with emphasis on modes of transmission of clinically important infectious agents and the analysis of epidemiological data. Three lecture hours a week. (On demand)
BIOL 4255. Bacterial Genetics. (3) Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in BIOL 3166 or permission of department. Regulation of gene expression in bacterial systems. Bacteriophage genetics. DNA transfer in bacteria. (Spring)
BIOL 4256. Pathogenic Bacteriology. (3) Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in BIOL 4250. Cellular and molecular interactions of mammalian hosts with prokaryotic parasites. (Fall)
BIOL 4256L. Pathogenic Bacteriology Laboratory. (1)  Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in BIOL 4250L. Prerequisite or corequisite: BIOL 4256. One laboratory period of three hours a week. (Fall)
BIOL 4257. Microbial Physiology and Metabolism. (3) Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in BIOL 4250. Lectures in microbial metabolism and physiology, including such topics as bacterial nutrition, transport mechanisms, catabolism and energy production, biosynthesis, global regulation of gene expression. Three one-hour lectures per week. (Spring)
BIOL 4257L. Microbial Physiology and Metabolism Lab. (1) Prerequisite or corequisite: BIOL 4257. Laboratory exercises covering such topics in general microbiology as characterization of microbial growth, transport, preparation and use of cell-free systems, isolation and electrophoresis of periplasmic proteins, isolation and characterization of membrane lipids, and the polymerase chain reaction. One three-hour lab per week. (On demand)
BIOL 4259. Virology. (3) Prerequisites: a grade of C or better in BIOL 4250, 4250L and CHEM 2132. Morphology, classification, genetics, and pathogenicity of bacterial and animal viruses. (Fall)
BIOL 4259L. Virology Laboratory. (1) Prerequisite (a grade of C or better in) or corequisite: BIOL 4259. One laboratory period of three hours per week. (On demand)
BIOL 4260. Population Genetics. (3) Prerequisites: a grade of C or better in STAT 1221 and BIOL 3166. The genetics of qualitative and quantitative traits in populations, including an assessment of the factors affecting the extent and pattern of the genetic variation in these traits. (On demand)
BIOL 4277. Endocrinology. (3) Prerequisites: a grade of C or better in BIOL 3273. Endocrine glands and their physiological roles in metabolism, growth and reproduction. (On demand)
BIOL 4277L. Endocrinology Laboratory. (1) Prerequisite or corequisite: BIOL 4277. One laboratory period of three hours a week. (On demand)
BIOL 4279. Neurobiology. (3) Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in BIOL 3273. Physiology and anatomy of nervous systems, especially mammalian. (On demand)
BIOL 4279L. Neurobiology Laboratory. (1) Prerequisite or corequisite: a grade of C or better in BIOL 4279. One laboratory period of three hours a week. (On demand)
BIOL 4282. Developmental Plant Anatomy. (3) Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in BIOL 2130. Study of plant cells, tissues, organs, and patterns of growth and differentiation. (On demand)
BIOL 4282L. Developmental Plant Anatomy Laboratory. (1) Prerequisite or corequisite: BIOL 4282. One laboratory period of three hours a week. (On demand)
BIOL 4283. Animal Development. (3) Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in BIOL 3111. Developmental processes occurring chiefly during gametogenesis, fertilization, early embryogenesis, and organogenesis. (On demand)
BIOL 4283L. Animal Development Laboratory. (1) Prerequisite or corequisite: BIOL 4283. One laboratory period of three hours a week. (On demand)
BIOL 4291. Histology. (4) Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in BIOL 2130. Animal tissues and organs; techniques of preparing tissues for analysis. Three lecture hours and one laboratory period of three hours a week. (On demand)
BIOL 4292. Advances in Immunology. (3) Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in BIOL 4251 or permission of department. Current topics in immunology with particular emphasis upon the genetic systems and molecular mechanisms underlying immune reactions. Additional work required by graduate students. (On demand)
BIOL 4293. Comparative Vertebrate Anatomy. (4) Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in BIOL 3111. Comparison of selected anatomical systems across vertebrates, with emphasis on evolution and functional analyses. Three hours of lecture and one laboratory period of three hours per week. (Spring)
BIOL 4405. Internship/Laboratory Research. (1-3) Prerequisite: permission of the instructor, and permission of the Biotechnology Program director. A biotechnology-oriented internship with either an organization or within a biotechnology-related laboratory within the Departments of Biology, Civil Engineering, or Chemistry. This course is required to obtain a Minor in Biotechnology. (Spring, Summer, Fall)
BIOL 4600. Senior Seminar. (1) (O,W) Prerequisite: Senior standing. Required of all majors. Student presentation of oral and written reports from pertinent biological literature. Exit exam for biology majors will be administered. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
BIOL 4601. Honors Seminar. (2) (O,W) Open by invitation to juniors. Exploration of the nature of science, ethics in science, critical analysis, hypothesis testing and statistical analysis, peer review, and research skills. Students analyze professional research papers, present their analyses orally, select an Honors Advisor, and write a research proposal. Exit exam for biology majors will be administered. Two lecture hours with occasional additional hours to attend special lectures and seminars. (Spring)
BIOL 4700. Honors Research I. (3) Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in BIOL 4601. Senior status. Independent Honors project: proposal, and research. By invitation. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
BIOL 4701. Honors Research II. (3) (O,W) Prerequisite: BIOL 4700. Independent Honors project: thesis preparation and presentation of results. May be substituted for BIOL 4600 and for one lab. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
BLAW 3150. Business Law I. (3) Prerequisite: INFO 2130, junior standing, business major or permission of the department. A study of the legal setting of business and its relationship to the business firm. Topics covered include: the nature of law and the court system, criminal and civil procedure, alternative dispute resolution, constitutional authority to regulate business, business ethics, criminal law, torts, contracts, the law of sales, intellectual property, and cyberlaw. (Fall, Spring)
BLAW 3250. Business Law II. (3) Prerequisite: BLAW 3150; junior standing, business major or permission of the department. The study of the Uniform Commercial Code. Subjects covered include commercial paper, bank deposits and collections, letters of credit, documents of title, secured transactions, creditors rights and bankruptcy, agency law, employment law and government regulation of business, business organizations and securities regulation, real and personal property, insurance, wills, trusts, and estates. (Yearly)
BUSN 1100. Freshman Honors Seminar. (1) Prerequisites: Freshman standing in the Business Honors Program. A study of selected topics that impact the potential for success of business honors students in school and beyond. Topics include university life, corporate and community interaction, career selection, keys to success and practitioner interaction, among others. (Fall)
BUSN 2000. Topics in Business and Economics. (1- 3) Current topics from business and economics. May be repeated for credit as topics vary with permission of student’s major department chair. (On demand)
BUSN 2400. Business Honors Internship. (1) Prerequisites: Sophomore, junior or senior students in good standing in the Business Honors Program, and the completion of INFO 2130 or equivalent. Requires permission of Assistant Dean for Undergraduate Programs. May be taken for repeat credit with different companies for up to a maximum of three (3) semester hours of credit. Provides a meaningful work experience, appropriate for the level of completed coursework of the student. Requires 50-150 hours of supervised employment. Requires a summary paper describing the business issues and processes learned through the experience. Internship proposals may be initiated by the student or by the Assistant Dean for Undergraduate Programs. Students should consult with the Assistant Dean for Undergraduate Programs in advance of registration to verify acceptability of work experience. Proposal forms must be completed and approved prior to registration. Graded on a Pass/No Credit Basis. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
BUSN 3770. Business Honors Thesis Topics. (1) Prerequisite: permission of the Assistant Dean for Undergraduate Programs. Exploration of current business research topics through presentations by business faculty. Graded on a Pass/No Credit Basis. (Spring)
BUSN 3780. Business Honors Seminar. (3) Prerequisites: permission of the Assistant Dean for Undergraduate Programs. Exploration of current topics in business and the methods of research appropriate to them. Development of research project proposal for Business Honors Thesis (BUSN 3790). (Spring)
BUSN 3790. Business Honors Thesis. (3) Prerequisites: BUSN 3780 and permission of the Assistant Dean for Undergraduate Programs. Honors project directed by Business Honors committee or assigned faculty member. One faculty contact hour per week and independent research. (On demand)
CEGR 2101. Civil Engineering Drawing. (2) Introduction to engineering drawing in the environmental, geotechnical, transportation, and structural sub-disciplines of civil engineering, including sketching, principles of Mechanical drawing, and computer aided drawing (CAD). CAD utilizes the MOSAIC computing environment. One hour of lecture and three hours of laboratory per week. (Fall)
CEGR 2102. Engineering Economic Analysis. (3) Prerequisite: ENGR 1201. Economic analysis of engineering solutions; present and annual worth analysis; cost benefit analysis; internal rate of return analysis; bonds and cost estimating. Three hours per week. (Fall)
CEGR 2104. Surveying and Site Design. (3) Prerequisite: ENGR 1202. Elements of plane surveying, including taping, use of level, transit, theodolite, and total station; topographical surveying and mapping; error adjustment; area and volume computations; introduction to photogrammetry; site development; computer applications. One hour of lecture and 3 hours of field work for four weeks: three hours of lecture for 11 weeks. (Spring)
CEGR 2154. Design Project Lab. (2)  Prerequisite: CEGR 2102. Corequisite: ENGR 1202. Problem definition, evaluation of design alternatives, design concepts, conceptual design. Students work together in teams to find, present, and defend their solutions to real world civil engineering problems. One hour of lecture and 3 hours of laboratory per week. (Spring)
CEGR 3090. Special Topics in Civil Engineering. (1- 4) Prerequisite: Permission of CE Advisor. Examination of specific new areas emerging in the various fields of civil engineering based upon and synthesizing knowledge students have gained from engineering science, mathematics, and physical science stems of the core curriculum. May be repeated for credit. (On demand)
CEGR 3122. Structural Analysis. (3) Prerequisites: MEGR 2144 and MATH 2171 and junior standing. Analysis of statically determinate and indeterminate beams, trusses and frames to include shear and moment diagrams, rough deflected shapes and deflections; influence lines and criteria for moving loads; indeterminate analyses to include methods of consistent deflection, slope deflection, and moment distribution. (Fall, Spring)
CEGR 3141. Introduction to Environmental Engineering. (3) Prerequisite: MATH 2171, CHEM 1251, and junior standing. Environmental engineering concepts, including stream pollution analysis, water and wastewater treatment processes; solid and hazardous waste management practices; pollution problems and controls; mass balance analyses, and review of pertinent legislation. (Fall, Spring)
CEGR 3143. Hydraulics and Hydrology. (3) Prerequisites: MEGR 2141 and MATH 2171 and junior standing. Fluid properties, pressure, closedconduit flow, pipe network, pumps, open channel flow, weirs, orifices, flumes; precipitation, runoff, groundwater flow, steam flow, flow measurement. (Fall)
CEGR 3153. Transportation Laboratory. (1)  Corequisite: CEGR 3161. Design of transportation systems, including highways, airports, pipelines, and mass transit; route layout, geometric design and earthwork calculations; computer-aided system simulation and evaluation. One hour of lecture and three hours of laboratory per week. (Spring)
CEGR 3155. Environmental Laboratory. (1)  Prerequisite: CHEM 1251L, Corequisite: CEGR 3141. Laboratory problems in environmental engineering. Emphasis on analysis and presentation of results as well as on the significance of results as they affect theory and/or practice. One hour of lecture and three hours of laboratory per week. (Fall)
CEGR 3161. Transportation Engineering I. (3) Prerequisite: MATH 2241; CEGR 2102, 2104, and junior standing. Analysis of transportation facilities; planning, location, and economic considerations, with special emphasis on land transportation. (Fall, Spring)
CEGR 3201. Systems and Design I. (3) Prerequisites: CEGR 2154, Senior standing; three of the following and the rest in progress: CEGR 3122, 3151, 3143, 3161, 3278. Systems engineering techniques applied to civil engineering problems emphasizing methodological considerations and engineering projects carried out by small groups of students. (Fall)
CEGR 3202. Systems and Design II. (4) Prerequisites: CEGR 3201 in immediate previous semester. Continuation of CEGR 3201. Creatively investigate the produce alternative solutions for a comprehensive engineering project resulting in written and verbal class presentations. One hour of lecture and three hours of laboratory per week. (Spring)
CEGR 3212. Computer Applications in Civil Engineering. (3) Prerequisite: Three of the following: CEGR 3122, 3141, 3143, 3161, 3278. Application of computers and numerical methods to various types of civil engineering problems. Examinations in depth of selected civil engineering problems. (On demand)
CEGR 3221. Structural Steel Design I. (3) Prerequisites: CEGR 3122 and CEGR 3255 or permission of CE Advisor. Analysis and design of structural steel components with emphasis on theories necessary for a thorough understanding of the design procedure. Design philosophies and types of steel structures. Columns, tension members and laterally supported beams are considered. General Flexural theory, including bending of unsymmetrical sections. Current AISC Specifications used. (Fall)
CEGR 3225. Reinforced Concrete Design I. (3) Prerequisite: CEGR 3122 and CEGR 3255 or permission of CE Advisor. Analysis and design of reinforced concrete components with emphasis on fundamental theories. Mechanics and behavior of reinforced concrete. Flexural members to include singly and doubly-reinforced beams of various cross sections (rectangular, T-beams, joists, one-way slabs, and others). Shear in beams and columns. Short columns to include uniaxial and biaxial bending. Construction of short column interaction diagrams. Introduction to footings. Current ACI Specifications. (Fall)
CEGR 3232. Urban Engineering. (3) Prerequisite: Permission of CE Advisor. An examination of those societal problems of metropolitan regions most amenable to engineering solutions. Current urban literature will be reviewed in seminar, and selected topics amenable to engineering analysis will be studied. Written reports will be presented. (On demand)
CEGR 3255. Structural Materials Laboratory I. (1)  Prerequisite: CEGR 3122. Composition, properties, and testing of: wood, natural and artificial aggregates, bitumins, portland cement concrete, pozzolans, and structural metals. Data analysis, presentation, and report writing. One hour of lecture and three hours of laboratory per week. (Spring)
CEGR 3258. Geotechnical Laboratory. (1)  Corequisite: CEGR 3278. Test to determine engineering properties of soils; consistency, permeability, shear strength, and consolidation. Data analysis, presentation and report writing. One hour of lecture and three hours of laboratory per week. (Fall)
CEGR 3278. Geotechnical Engineering. (3) Prerequisite: MATH 2171, and MEGR 2144. Soil origin, formation, composition, and classification; permeability; seepage; soil mechanics principles, including stresses, shear strength, and consolidation; foundations, retaining structures, and slope stability. Integration of design and technical reporting. (Fall, Spring)
CEGR 3282. Professional Development. (1) Prerequisite: graduation date before next fall semester. A series of one-hour lectures by faculty and invited speakers on basic concepts of professionalism and the nature and purpose of engineering ethics. Pass/No Credit grading. (Fall)
CEGR 3695. Civil Engineering Cooperative Education Seminar. (1) Required of co-op students following each work semester. Presentation of engineering reports on work done prior semester. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
CEGR 3890. Individualized Study. (1-3) Prerequisite: Permission of CEE Advisor. Supervised individual study within an area of a student’s particular interest which is beyond the scope of existing courses. May be repeated for credit. (On demand)
CEGR 3990. Undergraduate Research in Civil Engineering. (1-4) Prerequisite: Permission of CE Advisor. This course involves independent study of a theoretical and/or experimental problem in a specialized area of Civil Engineering. May be repeated for credit. (On demand)
CEGR 4090. Special Topics in Civil Engineering. (1-4) Permission of CE Advisor. Study of specific new areas emerging in the various fields of civil engineering. May be repeated for credit. (On demand)
CEGR 4108. Finite Element Analysis and Applications. (3) Prerequisite: CEGR 3122 with a grade of C or better. Finite element method and its application to engineering problems. Application of displacement method to plane stress, plane strain, plate bending and axisymmetrical bodies. Topics include but are not limited to dynamics, fluid mechanics, and structural mechanics. (Spring)
CEGR 4121. Prestressed Concrete Design. (3) Prerequisites: CEGR 3225 and 4224 or permission of CE Advisor. Analysis and design of prestressed components and systems, including materials and systems for prestressing, loss of prestress, flexural and shear design in accordance with current building codes, analysis of indeterminate prestressed systems, and control of camber, deflection and cracking. (On demand)
CEGR 4123. Bridge Design. (3) Prerequisites: CEGR 3221 and 3225, or permission of CE Advisor. Review of bridge design codes and loadings; superstructure and substructure design of short, intermediate, and long span bridges constructed of steel and concrete; earthquake design; segmental and cable-stayed bridges. (Spring) (Alternate years)
CEGR 4124. Masonry Design. (3) Prerequisite: CEGR 3122 with a grade of C or better and CEGR 3225. Introduction of masonry material and engineering and materials properties and testing procedures. Design of reinforced and nonreinforced masonry (clay and concrete) walls, beams, and columns for vertical, winde, and seismic loads. Analysis and design of masonry structures (including torsion) and introduction to computer applications. (On demand)
CEGR 4128. Matrix Methods of Structural Analysis. (3) Prerequisite: CEGR 3122 or permission of CE Advisor. Derivation of the basic equations governing linear structural systems. Application of stiffness and flexibility methods of trusses and frames. Solution techniques utilizing digital computer. (On demand)
CEGR 4141. Process Engineering. (3) Prerequisite: CEGR 3141 or permission of CE Advisor. Applications of material and energy balance principles to the study of chemical, biological, and environmental engineering processes. Overview of applied biotechnology, engineering thermodynamics, and kinetics. (Fall)
CEGR 4142. Water/Wastewater Engineering. (3) Prerequisite: CEGR 3141or permission of CE Advisor. Analysis and design of water and wastewater treatment processes including physical, chemical and biological treatment. Computer-aided design of treatment systems. (Spring)
CEGR 4143. Solid Waste Management. (3) Prerequisite: CEGR 3141 or permission of CE Advisor. Solid waste management, sources, generation rates, processing and handling, disposal, recycling, landfill closures, and remedial actions for abandoned waste sites. (Spring) (Alternate years)
CEGR 4144. Engineering Hydrology. (3) Prerequisite: CEGR 3143. The quantitative study of the various components of the water cycle, including precipitation, runoff, ground water flow, evaporation and transpiration, steam flow. Hydrograph analysis, flood routing, frequency and duration, reservoir design, computer applications. (On demand)
CEGR 4145. Groundwater Resources Engineering. (3) Prerequisite: CEGR 3143. Overview of hydrological cycle principles of ground water flow and well hydraulics. Regional groundwater flow and flow nets. Water chemistry and contamination. Applications of groundwater modeling. (Fall)
CEGR 4146. Advanced Engineering Hydraulics. (3) Prerequisite: CEGR 3143 or permission of CE Advisor. Problems of liquids as applied in civil engineering; open channel flow; dams and spillways; water power; river flow and backwater curves; pipe networks, fire flow, sewage collection, groundwater, computer applications. (On demand)
CEGR 4161. Advanced Traffic Engineering. (3) Prerequisite: CEGR 3161 or permission of CE Advisor. Analysis of basic characteristics of drivers, vehicles, and roadway that affect the performance of road systems. Stream flow elements, volume, density, speed. Techniques of traffic engineering measurements, investigations and data analysis, capacity analysis. Intersections, accidents, parking. (Fall)
CEGR 4162. Transportation Planning. (3) Prerequisite: CEGR 3161. Urban transportation; travel characteristics of urban transportation systems; analysis of transportation-oriented studies; analytic methods of traffic generation, distribution, modal split, and assignment; traffic flow theory. (On demand)
CEGR 4171. Urban Public Transportation. (3) Prerequisite: CEGR 3161 or permission of CE Advisor. Planning, design, and operation of bus, rail, and other public modes. Relationship between particular modes and characteristics of urban areas. Funding, security and other administrative issues. (On demand)
CEGR 4181. Human Factors in Traffic Engineering. (3) Prerequisite: CEGR 3161 or permission of CE Advisor. Study of the driver's and pedestrian's relationship with the traffic system, including roadway, vehicle, and environment. Consideration of the driving task, driver and pedestrian characteristics, performance and limitations with regard to traffic facility design and operation. (On demand)
CEGR 4182. Transportation Environmental Assessment. (3) Prerequisites: Senior standing and permission of CE Advisor. A study of the environmental impact analysis and assessment procedures for transportation improvements. Route location decisions. Noise, air quality, socio-economic, and other impacts. (Fall) (Even years)
CEGR 4183. Traffic Engineering Studies. (3) Prerequisite: STAT 3128. Introduction to the traffic engineering studies most used by traffic engineers, including data collection techniques, statistical analysis procedures, report writing and presentation. One hour of lecture and three hours of laboratory per week. (On demand)
CEGR 4184. Highway Safety. (3) Prerequisite: CEGR 3161 and STAT 3128. Engineering responses at the state and local levels to the problem of highway safety. Extent of the highway safety problem, elements of traffic accidents, common accident countermeasures, collection and analysis of accident data, evaluation of safety-related projects and programs, and litigation issues. (On demand)
CEGR 4185. Geometric Design of Highways. (3) Prerequisite: CEGR 3153 and CEGR 3161. Theory and practice of geometric design of highways including intersections, interchanges, parking and drainage facilities. Driver ability, vehicle performance, safety and economics are considered. Two hours of lecture and three laboratory hours per week. (On demand)
CEGR 4222. Structural Steel Design II. (3) Prerequisite: CEGR 3122 with a grade of C or better and CEGR 3221. Analysis and design of structural steel components and systems with emphasis on theories necessary for a thorough understanding of the design of complete structures. Compression members affected by local buckling, continuous beams, and beam columns are covered. Welded and bolted connections. Current AISC Specifications used. (Spring)
CEGR 4224. Advanced Structural Analysis. (3) Prerequisite: CEGR 3122 with a grade of C or better. A continuation of CEGR 3122. Methods to determine deflections in structural members, including moment area, conjugate beam, virtual work, and matrix stiffness methods. Project to compare analysis techniques and introduce use of structural analysis computer programs. (Spring)
CEGR 4226. Reinforced Concrete Design II. (3) Prerequisite: CEGR 3122 with a grade of C or better and CEGR 3225. Analysis and design of reinforced concrete components and systems with emphasis on the fundamental theories necessary for a thorough understanding of concrete structures. Concentrically loaded slender columns, slender columns under compression plus bending. Wall footings and column footings. Analysis of continuous beams and frames. Total design project involving the analysis and design of a concrete structure. Current ACI Specifications used. (Spring)
CEGR 4241. Chemical Processes in Water and Wastewater Treatment. (3) Prerequisites: CHEM 1251 and CEGR 3141, or permission of CE Advisor. Chemical principles involved in the treatment of water and wastewaters; principles of chemical equilibrium relevant to natural water systems; the nature and effect of chemical interactions of domestic and industrial waste effluents on natural water systems. (On demand)
CEGR 4262. Traffic Engineering. (3) Prerequisite: CEGR 3161 or permission of CE Advisor. Operation and management of street and highway systems. Traffic control systems, traffic flow theory, and highway capacity. Evaluation of traffic engineering alternatives and the conduct of traffic engineering studies. (Spring)
CEGR 4270. Earth Pressures and Retaining Structures. (3) Prerequisites: CEGR 3122 and 3278 or permission of CE Advisor. Earth pressure theories, effects of wall friction and external loads (including earthquake); design of rigid retaining walls (including structural details); sheetpile wall design; soil reinforcement systems for retaining structures; computer applications. (On demand)
CEGR 4271. Pavement Design. (3) Prerequisites: CEGR 3161 and 3278, or permission of CE Advisor. Pavement design concepts and considerations; engineering properties of pavement materials, including soils, bases, asphalt concrete, and portland cement concrete; design of flexible and rigid pavements including shoulders and drainage; computer applications for pavement analysis and design. (On demand)
CEGR 4278. Geotechnical Engineering II. (3) Prerequisite: CEGR 3278 or permission of CE Advisor; corequisite: CEGR 3258. Design of shallow and deep foundations, including structural considerations; lateral earth pressure theories; design of rigid and flexible earth retaining structures; advanced aspects of slope stability analysis; and computer applications. (Spring)
CEGR 4892. Individualized Study and Projects. (1-6) Prerequisites: Permission of CE Advisor. Individual investigation and exposition of results. May be repeated for credit. (On demand)
CHEM 1111L. Laboratory in Chemistry. (1) Prerequisite or corequisite: CHEM 1111. Laboratory exercises to demonstrate what chemists do, techniques used in the laboratory, and the limitations inherent in any laboratory experiment. One three-hour laboratory per week. (Credit will be given for only one course: 1111L, 1203L, or 1251L.) (Fall or Spring)
CHEM 1112L. Laboratory in Chemistry. (1) Prerequisite: CHEM 1111 and 1111L. Prerequisite or corequisite: CHEM 1112. Continuation of CHEM 1111L. One three-hour laboratory per week. (Credit will be given for only one course: 1112L, 1204L, or 1252L.) (Spring, Summer)
CHEM 1203. General Chemistry. (3) Primarily for nursing majors. Qualifies as a prerequisite only for CHEM 1204. Fundamentals of chemistry and selected topics from inorganic chemistry. Three lecture hours and one Problem Session hour per week. (Credit will be given for only one course: 1111, 1203, or 1251.) (Fall, Summer)
CHEM 1203L. General Chemistry Laboratory. (1) Prerequisite or corequisite: CHEM 1203. Laboratory investigations into the nature of inorganic compounds. One three-hour laboratory per week. (Credit will be given for only one course: 1111L, 1203L, or 1251L.) (Fall, Summer)
CHEM 1204. General Chemistry. (3) Prerequisite: CHEM 1203. Continuation of CHEM 1203, with emphasis on organic chemistry and selected topics in biochemistry. Does not qualify as a prerequisite for any other chemistry course. Three lecture hours and one Problem Session hour per week. (Credit will be given for only one course: 1112, 1204, or 1252.) (Spring, Summer)
CHEM 1204L. General Chemistry Laboratory. (1) Prerequisites: CHEM 1203 and 1203L. Perquisite or corequisite: CHEM 1204. Continuation of CHEM 1203L with emphasis on the reactions and characterization of organic compounds. One threehour laboratory per week. (Credit will be given for only one course: 1112L, 1204L, or 1252L. (Spring, Summer)
CHEM 1251. Principles of Chemistry I. (3) A principles-oriented course for science majors. Fundamental postulates and laws of chemistry; the relationship of atomic structure to physical and chemical properties of the elements. Three lecture hours and one Problem Session hour per week. (Credit will be given for only one course: 1111, 1203, or 1251.) (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
CHEM 1251L. Principles of Chemistry Laboratory I. (1) Prerequisite or corequisite: CHEM 1251. Experimental investigations involving the fundamental postulates and laws of chemistry. One three-hour laboratory per week. (Credit will be given for only one course: 1111L, 1203L, or 1251L.) (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
CHEM 1252. Principles of Chemistry II. (3) Prerequisite: CHEM 1251 with a grade of C or better. Continuation of CHEM 1251. Three lecture hours and one Problem Session hour per week. (Credit will be given for only one course: 1112, 1204, or 1252.) (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
CHEM 1252L. Principles of Chemistry Laboratory II. (1) Prerequisites: CHEM 1251 and 1251L. Prerequisite or corequisite: CHEM 1252. Continuation of CHEM 1251L. One three-hour laboratory per week. (Credit will be given for only one course: 1112L, 1204L, or 1252L.) (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
CHEM 1253L. Introduction to Modern Laboratory Methods. (1) Prerequisite or corequisite: CHEM 1252. For students planning to take additional chemistry courses; can be substituted for the 1252L requirement for all degrees in Chemistry. Open-ended studies on topics compatible with CHEM 1252 lecture materials. A quasi-research approach is used, involving modern instrumentation extensively. The background needed to utilize microcomputers in data acquisition and data reduction is presented. One three-hour laboratory per week. (On demand)
CHEM 2125. Inorganic Chemistry. (3) Prerequisite: CHEM 1252 with a grade of C or better. Descriptive inorganic chemistry including acid-based and non-aqueous solvent concepts. (Spring)
CHEM 2130. Survey of Organic Chemistry. (3) Prerequisite: CHEM 1251 and 1252, each with a C or better. A survey of organic chemistry, including aldehydes, ketones, amines, amides and carboxylic acids, designed to meet the needs of BA Biology majors. (Spring)
CHEM 2131. Organic Chemistry I. (3) Prerequisite: CHEM 1251 and 1252, each with a grade of C or better. Descriptive principles and techniques of organic chemistry and their applications to reactions of aliphatic and aromatic compounds and natural products. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
CHEM 2131L. Organic Chemistry Laboratory I. (1) Prerequisites: CHEM 1251, 1251L, 1252 and 1252L, each with a C or better. Prerequisite or corequisite: CHEM 2131 or 2130 with a grade of C or better. Laboratory investigations into the physical and chemical properties of organic compounds. One laboratory period of three hours per week. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
CHEM 2132. Organic Chemistry II. (3) Prerequisite: CHEM 2131 with a grade of C or better. Continuation of CHEM 2131. Three lecture hours and one Problem Session hour per week. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
CHEM 2132L. Organic Chemistry Laboratory II. (1) Prerequisite: CHEM 2131L with a grade of C or better. Prerequisite or corequisite: CHEM 2132. Continuation of CHEM 2131L. One laboratory period of three hours per week. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
CHEM 2136L. Organic Chemistry Laboratory. (1) Prerequisite or corequisite: CHEM 2132. Laboratory investigation involving a research-type project in lieu of CHEM 2132L. Available only upon departmental invitation. (On demand)
CHEM 2141. Survey of Physical Chemistry. (3) Prerequisites: CHEM 1252, 1252L with grades of C or better, MATH 1120 or one semester of calculus (high school or higher), PHYS 1101 or one semester of physics (high school or higher). A course designed for students in the life sciences or others desiring a one-semester survey of the physical aspects of chemistry. Application of thermodynamics to chemical reactions, energy transfer processes, and chemical and physical equilibria; the study of reaction rates and mechanisms; structure of gases, liquids, and solids; molecular structure and spectroscopy. (Spring)
CHEM 3090. Special Topics in Chemistry. (1-4) Prerequisite: Permission of department. Topics chosen from analytical, biochemistry, inorganic, organic, and physical chemistry. Repeatable for credit. Lecture and/or laboratory hours will vary with the nature of the course taught. (On demand)
CHEM 3111. Quantitative Analysis. (4) Prerequisites: CHEM 1252, 1252L with grades of C or better. Introductory to quantitative and analytical chemistry. Principles of equilibrium, classical and simple instrumental approaches are considered. Two lecture hours and two laboratory periods of three hours each week. (Fall)
CHEM 3112. Modern Separation Techniques. (4) Prerequisites: CHEM 2131, 2131L and 3111 with grades of C or better. A theoretical and application course in modern separation techniques with emphasis on liquid and gas chromatography. Two lecture hours and two laboratory periods of three hours each week. (On demand)
CHEM 3113. Survey of Instrumental Methods of Analysis. (4) Prerequisites: CHEM 3111 with a grade of C or better. Methods of instrumental analysis with emphasis on sample handling, instrument parameters, data handling, and trouble-shooting in various areas that include Potentiometry, Spectroscopy, Mass Spectrometry, and Chromatography. Either CHEM 3113 or 3112, but not both, may be used to meet requirements for the B.A. degree. Credit will not be given for both CHEM 3113 and 4111. Two lecture hours and two three-hour laboratory periods per week. (On demand)
CHEM 3141. Physical Chemistry. (3) Prerequisites: CHEM 1252 and 1252L, each with a grade of C or better; MATH 1241 and 1242; PHYS 2102 and 2102L. Prerequisite or corequisite: At least one of the following: MATH 2241, 2242, 2164, 2171, STAT 3128, or a department-approved mathematics course. Quantum chemistry, atomic and molecular structure, spectroscopy. (Fall)
CHEM 3141L. Physical Chemistry Laboratory. (1) Prerequisites: CHEM 1252, 1252L, and 3141, each with a grade of C or better; MATH 1241 and 1242; PHYS 2102 and 2102L; or permission of the instructor. Prerequisite or corequisite: At least one of the following: MATH 2241, 2242, 2164, 2171, STAT 3128, or a department-approved mathematics course. Kinetic theory of gases, statistical and classical thermodynamics, kinetics. (Spring)
CHEM 3142. Physical Chemistry. (3) Prerequisites: CHEM 1252, 1252L with a grade of C or better; MATH 1241 and 1242; PHYS 2102 and 2102L. Prerequisite or corequisite: At least one of the following: MATH 2241, 2242, 2164, 2171, 3125, or a department-approved mathematics course. Kinetic theory of gases, statistical and classical thermodynamics, kinetics. (Spring)
CHEM 3142L. Physical Chemistry Laboratory. (1) Prerequisite: CHEM 3141L with a grade of C or better. Prerequisite or corequisite: CHEM 3141 or 3142. Continuation of CHEM 3141L. One laboratory period of three hours per week. (Spring)
CHEM 3197. Internship in Community Education and Service. (1-3) Prerequisites: Junior standing, acceptance into the program, and approval of department. A project-oriented, service learning internship with a cooperating community organization. (Credit toward the B.A. and B.S. degrees in Chemistry will not be given.) May be repeated for credit with department permission. Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. (On demand)
CHEM 3500. Chemistry Cooperative Education and 49ership Experience. (0) Prerequisites: Junior standing, chemistry through 2132 and acceptance into the Experiential Learning Program by the University Career Center. Enrollment in this course is required for chemistry majors during each semester or summer when they are working on a co-op or 49ership assignment. Participating students pay a course registration fee for transcript notation (49ership and co-op) and receive full-time student status (co-op only). Assignments must be arranged and approved in advance. Course may be repeated; evaluation is Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory. Only open to undergraduate students; Graduate level students are encouraged to contact their academic departments to inquire about academic or industrial internship options for credit. For more information, contact the University Career Center. (On demand)
CHEM 3695. Chemistry Seminar. (1)  Introduction to typical search methods, including computer searching, for the chemical reference works and chemical literature. Use of these search techniques for background development. Writing short papers on assigned topics in journal format. One three-hour laboratory session per week. (Fall, Spring)
CHEM 4090. Special Topics in Chemistry. (1-4) Prerequisite: Permission of the instructor. Selected topics in chemistry. Lecture and/or laboratory hours will vary with the nature of the course taught. Repeatable for credit. (On demand)
CHEM 4095. Topics for Teachers. (1-4) Prerequisite: Permission of instructor. Selected topics in chemical education. Lecture and/or laboratory hours will vary with the nature of the course taught. Repeatable for credit. (On demand)
CHEM 4111. Instrumental Analysis. (4) Prerequisites: CHEM 3111, 3141, 3141L with a grade of C or better. Selected modern instrumental methods of analysis, including theory and practice, with considerable attention given to the instrument and elementary electronics involved in the techniques. Two lecture hours and six hours of lab per week. (Spring)
CHEM 4121. Advanced Inorganic Chemistry. (4) Prerequisites: CHEM 3142, 3142L with a grade of C or better. Theoretical inorganic chemistry including the application of physicochemical principles to the study of inorganic systems. Laboratory work involves inorganic preparations and characterization techniques. Three lecture hours and one laboratory period of three hours a week. (Fall)
CHEM 4133. Methods of Organic Structure Determination. (2) Prerequisites: CHEM 2132, 2132L with grade of C or better. Study and application of modern techniques, primarily spectroscopy, to determine the structure of organic molecules. One hour of lecture and one laboratory period of three hours each week. (Spring)
CHEM 4134. Organic Reaction Mechanisms. (2) Prerequisites: CHEM 2132, 2132L with grade of C or better. Mechanistic and theoretical topics which are beyond the scope of CHEM 2131/2132, including orbital symmetry control of organic reactions, the Hammett Equation and other linear free energy relationships, heterocyclic compounds, polycyclic aromatic compounds, organic photochemistry, carbynes, nitrenes, arynes and other short lived, reactive intermediates. (Spring) (Alternate years)
CHEM 4135. Concepts and Techniques in Organic Synthesis. (2) Prerequisite or corequisite: CHEM 4133. Modern techniques of organic synthesis. Laboratory includes one or more multi-step syntheses of complex molecules. One hour of lecture and one laboratory period of three hours each week. (Spring)
CHEM 4165. Principles of Biochemistry I. (3) Prerequisite: CHEM 2132 with a grade of C or better. A study of the structures, properties, and functions of biological molecules, bioenergetics of biological reactions, and enzyme catalysis, with particular emphasis on the underlying chemical principles, including thermodynamics and kinetics. (Fall)
CHEM 4165L. Principles of Biochemistry I Laboratory. (1) Prerequisite: CHEM 2132L with a grade of C or better. Prerequisite or corequisite: CHEM 4165. Physical properties of biological molecules and an introduction to experimental techniques of biochemical research. Eleven four-hour lab periods. (Fall)
CHEM 4166. Principles of Biochemistry II. (3) Prerequisite: CHEM 4165 with a grade of C or better. A study of various metabolic pathways and information transfer, including molecular aspects of cell biology and genetics, with particular emphasis on the underlying chemical reactions, including thermodynamics and kinetics. (Spring)
CHEM 4167. Structure and Mechanism in Protein Chemistry. (3) Prerequisites: CHEM 4165, and either CHEM 4166 or BIOL 4171, or permission of the instructor. Examination of structures, properties, and functions of proteins, enzyme catalysis, and bioenergetics, emphasizing underlying mechanistic chemical and biochemical principles. (On demand)
CHEM 4171. Biochemical Instrumentation. (4) Prerequisites: CHEM 3111, 4165, and 4165L with a grade of C or better or the permission of the department. Modern instrumental methods used in biorelated areas such as biochemistry, biotechnology, and medical technology. Theory and practice. Electrochemistry, immunochemistry, spectroscopy, chromatography, sedimentation, and electrophoresis. Two lecture hours and two three-hour laboratory periods per week. (Spring) (Alternate years)
CHEM 4175. Physical Biochemistry. (3) Prerequisites: CHEM 4165, 4165L, 4166, and 3141 with a grade of C or better. Colloid systems, equilibria in biological fluids, mass and energy transport in fluids and in association with membranes, energy storage and dissipation with relation to specific chemical bonding, enzyme kinetics. (On demand)
CHEM 4185. Chemical Fate of Pollutants. (3) Prerequisites: Senior or Graduate Standing and CHEM 2132. Chemical reactivity and fate of pollutants (in air, water, soil) in terms of their chemical structure and energetics, mechanisms, structure/energy relationships and their interaction with reactive environmental species including light. (On demand)
CHEM 4200. Computational Chemistry. (4) Prerequisite (BA): CHEM 2125 or 2141 or permission of instructor. Prerequisite or corequisite (BS and MS): CHEM 3141 or permission of instructor. Electronic and molecular mechanics-based computational methods, including properties, optimized equilibrium and transition state structures and potential energy surfaces of reactions. Three lecture hours and three hours of laboratory each week. Additional projects required of graduate students. (Spring)
CHEM 4695. Chemistry Seminar. (1) (W, O) Prerequisites: CHEM 3695 and senior standing. Discussion of recent developments and special topics in chemistry. Written and oral reports are required. (Fall, Spring)
CHEM 4696. Chemistry Seminar. (1) (W, O) Prerequisites: CHEM 3695, CHEM 4695, and senior standing. Discussion of recent developments and special topics in chemistry. Written and oral reports are required. (Fall, Spring)
CHEM 4900. Directed Undergraduate Research. (1-4) Prerequisite: Permission of the instructor overseeing the research. Independent study and research in any of these fields of chemistry: organic, physical, analytical, inorganic chemistry or biochemistry. Hours for laboratory and library work to be determined. Repeatable for credit. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
CHFD 2111. Child Study: Interpreting Children’s Behavior. (3) Growth of individuals and the forces which influence this growth. Current theories of child development with emphasis on the complex interaction between heredity and environmental factors. (Fall, Summer)
CHFD 2113. Infant and Early Years. (3) Examination of development from its beginnings to early childhood with emphasis on theories, research, and other data relative to infancy and the early years and implications for curriculum design. (Fall, Summer)
CHFD 2115. Education of the Young Child. (3) Developmental needs of children as related to group care situations, curriculum decisions, and the design of early learning environments. Emphasis on current issues, the role of the caregiver (parent and/or teacher), and the process of guiding and teaching young children. (Designed to complement Practicum II). (Spring)
CHFD 2412. Practicum I: Observing and Recording Children’s Behavior. (3) Investigates the purposes and methods of observation of young children. Content includes observational activities, actual and simulated, individual and group. Students will observe, record, and analyze children’s physicalmotor, social, emotional, moral, and cognitive development using developmental theory. (Designed as the Field Study for CHFD 2111). (Fall)
CHFD 2416. Practicum II: The Child and the Community. (3) A supervised practicum with placements in settings depicting care and educational learning experiences for children. Emphasis on program components, the evaluation and development of materials and practices for care and education. Students spend two half-days per week in placement. (Designed as the Field Study for CHFD 2115). (Spring)
CHFD 3112. Approaches to Preschool Education. (3)  Prerequisite: Open only to CHFD majors and minors with a GPA of at least 2.5. Strategies for program analysis, design, implementation, and evaluation of programs for infants and young children. (Fall)
CHFD 3113. Parent Education. (3) Prerequisite: Open only to CHFD majors and minors with a GPA of at least 2.5. An emphasis on communication, homeschool partnerships, family dynamics, and the community/school relationship. (Spring, Summer)
CHFD 3115. Learning and Development. (3) Prerequisite: Open only to CHFD majors and minors with a GPA of at least 2.5. Examination of the relationship of learning and development with emphasis on conceptualizing child development and interpreting data related to growth and development. Specific attention to the affective, cognitive, and psychomotor domains and theories as seen in a multicultural context. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
CHFD 3412. The Family and the Community (Birth to 3 Years). (3) Prerequisite: Open only to CHFD majors and minors with a GPA of at least 2.5. Influence of family and community on the development of infants and young children in the first three years of life is investigated through field-based experiences. Students complete an intensive internship in settings with children of typical and atypical ability. Family contact and parent interaction are emphasized. (Fall)
CHFD 3416. Internship in Child and Family Development. (12) Prerequisite: Open only to CHFD majors and minors with a GPA of at least 2.5 overall, and 2.75 in the major, and by permission of advisor. Intensive work with children and families in the field planned by student and advisor with focus on integration of theory and practice. (Spring)
CHFD 3619. Senior Seminar in Child and Family Development. (3)  Prerequisite: Open only to CHFD majors and minors with a GPA of at least 2.5 overall, and 2.75 in the major, and by permission of advisor. A synthesizing course of study focusing on review, compilation, analysis, and evaluation of the literature, research, and experiences relevant to the student’s area of focus. Students will present a plan of action/study for approval prior to registration for this semester. (Spring)
CHFD 3800. Individual Study in Child and Family Development. (1-6) Prerequisite: Permission of the student’s advisor. Independent study under the supervision of an appropriate faculty member. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
CHFD 4000. Topics in Child and Family Development. (1-6) May include classroom and/or clinical experiences in the content area. With department approval, may be repeated for credit for different topics. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
CHFD 4410. Student Teaching/Seminar: B-K Child and Family Development. (15)  Prerequisites: Approval of an Application for Student Teaching. Planned sequence of experiences in the student’s area of specialization conducted in an approved setting under the supervision and coordination of a University supervisor and a cooperating teacher. Student must demonstrate the competencies identified for the B-K teaching field. Approximately 35-40 hours per week in an assigned school setting and 10-12 on-campus seminars scheduled throughout the semester. (Fall, Spring)
CHNS 1201. Elementary Chinese I. (4) Fundamentals of the Chinese language, including speaking, listening comprehension, reading, and writing. (Fall)
CHNS 1202. Elementary Chinese II. (4) Prerequisite: CHNS 1201 or permission of the department. Fundamentals of the Chinese language, including speaking, listening comprehension, reading, and writing. (Spring)
CHNS 2201. Intermediate Chinese I. (4) Prerequisite: CHNS 1202 or permission of the department. Review of grammar, with conversation and composition. (Fall)
CHNS 2202. Intermediate Chinese II. (4) Prerequisite: CHNS 2201 or permission of the department. Continued review of grammar, conversation, and composition. (Spring)
CHNS 3050. Topics in Chinese. (1-3)  Course may be repeated with change of topic. (On demand)
CHNS 3201. Chinese Grammar and Conversation. (3) Prerequisite: CHNS 2202 or permission of the department. Review of Chinese grammar and guided conversation on prepared topics. Emphasis on spoken Chinese. (Fall)
CHNS 3202. Chinese Grammar and Conversation. (3) Prerequisite: CHNS 3201 or permission of the department. Review of Chinese grammar and guided compositions on prepared topics. Emphasis on vocabulary, idiomatic expressions, and stylistics. (Spring)
CJUS 1100. Introduction to Criminal Justice. (3) REQUIRED COURSE FOR MAJORS AND MINORS. Components of the criminal justice system are reviewed and their interrelatedness assessed; law enforcement, corrections and courts discussed; studies of the functions of the system reviewed. (Fall, Spring)
CJUS 2000. Introduction to Law Enforcement. (3) Critical examination of policing in terms of the past and present structures, methods, ethics, legal framework, and operations typical of contemporary American law enforcement agencies. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
CJUS 2102. Ethics and the Criminal Justice System. (3) The study of applied and professional ethics and ethical issues in the administration of justice. (On demand)
CJUS 2120. Juvenile Justice. (3) Intensive analysis of the administration of juvenile justice within the United States. Particular emphasis on decision making and procedures of police, courts, and correctional agencies for juveniles. (On demand)
CJUS 2154. Introduction to Corrections. (3) An overview of community and institutional corrections in the U.S. such as jails, probation, alternatives to incarceration, correctional institutions, treatment strategies, and parole. (Yearly)
CJUS 3000. Topics in Criminal Justice. (3) Prerequisite: CJUS 1100. Specialized criminal justice topics. May be repeated for credit. (On demand)
CJUS 3100. Criminal Justice Theory. (3) REQUIRED COURSE FOR MAJORS AND MINORS. This course provides students with an overview of the dominant theoretical explanations for crime and deviance. Special attention is given to the empirical research on these theories and their corresponding policy/program recommendations for reducing crime and delinquency in society. (Fall, Spring)
CJUS 3101. Research Methods in Criminal Justice. (4)  REQUIRED COURSE FOR MAJORS. Prerequisite: CJUS 1100, STAT 1222, declared Criminal Justice major, and junior standing. Research designs, data collection, and data analysis relevant to criminal justice. (Fall, Spring)
CJUS 3102. American Criminal Courts. (3) Prerequisite: CJUS 1100. Analysis of the court component of criminal justice with emphasis on social science literature concerning prosecutors, defense attorneys, judges, juries, and court reform policies. (Fall, Spring)
CJUS 3110. Criminal Justice and the Law. (3) Nature and development of criminal law including the concepts of criminal liability, responsibility, and capacity; comprehensive analysis of the various crimes against persons, property, and morality. (Fall, Spring)
CJUS 3111. Criminal Procedure. (3) Examines the rules that govern everyday operation of the criminal justice system from investigation to appeal. (Yearly)
CJUS 3112. Famous Criminal Trials of the Twentieth Century. (3) Prerequisites: Introduction to Criminal Justice (CJUS 1100) and at least junior standing or with permission of instructor. This course is a study of various American criminal trials from 1900-1999, and its purpose is to review specific cases and determine their effect upon, and reflection of, American society and/or culture at the time. Some of the cases discussed may include Sacco and Vanzetti, Scottsboro Boys, Chicago 7, and Dr. Jeff MacDonald. (Yearly)
CJUS 3120. The Juvenile Offender. (3) Measurement of juvenile delinquency, explanations of delinquent behavior and policies intended to both prevent and respond to delinquent behavior. (On demand)
CJUS 3121. Juvenile Law. (3) Statutory and case law relating to juveniles with special emphasis on the North Carolina Juvenile Code. (On demand)
CJUS 3130. The Administration of Criminal Justice. (3) (W, O) Examines major organizational theories and administrative functions with direct application to criminal justice agencies. (Yearly)
CJUS 3132. Interviewing in Criminal Justice. (3)  This course examines the interpersonal dynamics, theories, empirical research, and legal basis of the investigative interview necessary for the criminal justice professional. Special emphasis will be given to the establishment of rapport, the process of inquiry, the evaluation of response, cultural and age differences, and the need to remain within the legal bounds of the U.S. Constitution. (Yearly)
CJUS 3141. Law Enforcement Behavioral Systems. (3) Examines the issues surrounding the individual officer. Such issues include: selection, discretion, ethics, stress, the use of force, and the effects of culture. (On demand)
CJUS 3150. Community Corrections. (3) Structure, functions, and effectiveness of community corrections. Emphasis on the deinstitutionalization movement, community-based treatment centers, community service agencies, work release programs, and current trends in community corrections. (Yearly)
CJUS 3151. Institutional Corrections. (3) Structure, functions, and effectiveness of correctional institutions. Emphasis is on the history of corrections, classification of offenders, institutionalization, treatment programs, juvenile training schools, and the future of corrections. (Yearly)
CJUS 3152. Correctional Law. (3) Development, substance and operationalization of the law of corrections. (Alternate years)
CJUS 3153. Juvenile Corrections. (3) Examination of community-based and institutional correctional programs for juveniles and analysis of the effectiveness of these programs. (On demand)
CJUS 3200. Security and Loss Prevention. (3) Overview of the field of private security and loss prevention with emphasis on current legislation, loss prevention, risk management, and security countermeasures. (Yearly)
CJUS 3210. Problems and Decisions in Criminal Justice. (3)  Prerequisites: Junior standing and permission of the department. Evaluation of criminal justice policy and decision-making. (On demand)
CJUS 3220. The Criminal Offender. (3) Examines the research, theory, and practice of criminal behavior focusing primarily on interaction of the offender with social-environmental factors. (On demand)
CJUS 3310. Punishment and Freedom. (3) Crosslisted as HONR 3700-H01. Prerequisite: CJUS 1100 with a grade of C or better. This course probes the manner in which the notions of freedom and punishment are fundamentally bound to one another, and how, at their intersections, these constructs are the source of considerable speculation regarding consumerism, democracy, capitalism and ethics. 
CJUS 3400. Criminal Justice Practicum. (1-6) Prerequisite: CJUS 1100 and permission of the department and criminal justice agency. Supervised experience in a criminal justice agency. May be repeated for credit up to a maximum of 12 hours but with no more than six hours counting toward the major. (Fall, Spring)
CJUS 3800. Directed Individual Study. (1-4) Prerequisite: junior standing and permission of the department. Special problems. May be repeated for credit. Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. (Fall, Spring)
CJUS 4000. Topics in Criminal Justice. (1-6) Prerequisite: Permission of the department. Specialized criminal justice topics. May be repeated for credit. (Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis when taught as “Movies and the Portrayal of Crime and Justice.”) (Fall, Spring)
CJUS 4101. Drugs, Crime and the Criminal Justice System. (3) Use of drugs and their relationship to crime, including the impact of drugs on the individual and the criminal justice system. (On demand)
CJUS 4103. International Criminal Justice. (3) Prerequisite: junior standing. Examination of the patterns and trends in international crime such as terrorism, transnational organized crime, and trafficking in people, and a review of how the legal traditions of common law, civil law, Islamic law and socialist legal systems are structured and function. (On demand)
CJUS 4140. Community Oriented Policing and Problem Solving. (3) Prerequisites: CJUS 1100 and CJUS 2000 with a grade of C or better. The purpose of this course is to help students learn, in a practical hands on way, about community policing concepts, problems solving tools and resources, an crime prevention strategies that are currently used by law enforcement and community leaders. 
CJUS 4160. Victims and the Criminal Justice System. (3)  Relationship between victims of crime and the criminal justice system. Specific topics include an analysis of the characteristics of crime victims, victim reporting and nonreporting patterns, treatment of victims by the various segments of the criminal justice system, victim assistance programs and the issue of compensation and/or restitution for victims of crime. (On demand)
CJUS 4161. Violence and the Violent Offender. (3) Issues surrounding violence in today’s society and their impact on offenders involved in homicide, child and domestic abuse, and other forms of violence. Examination of myths about violence, victim-offender characteristics and relationships, and theories of violence. (On demand)
CJUS 4162. Seminar on Sexual Assault. (3)  This course provides a comprehensive and systematic, critical examination of sexual exploitation in the United States. Topics include: historical and legal perspectives; theories of causation; empirical evidence and practical policy implications in the areas of rape, child sexual abuse, and incest; domestic violence; pornography; sexual harassment, nuisance and dangerous obsessions; and serial killing. A reliance on guest speakers at the local, state, national and international levels greatly diversify this course (Yearly)
CJUS 4400. Research Practicum. (3) Prerequisites: CJUS 3100 and CJUS 3101. Development, analysis and presentation of independent research under the supervision of a faculty member. Graduate students are encouraged to register for CJUS 6800. (Fall, Spring)
CMET 1680. Professional Development I. (1) Prerequisite: Open to freshman level Civil Engineering Technology and Construction Management majors. Seminar discussing professional development issues relating to the civil engineering technology and construction management professions. One hour per week. Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. (Spring)
CMET 2680. Professional Development II. (1) Prerequisite: Open to sophomore level Civil Engineering Technology and Construction Management majors. Seminar discussing professional development issues relating to the civil engineering technology and construction management professions. One hour per week. Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. (Spring)
CMET 3224. Construction Project Administration. (3) Prerequisite: Junior Standing or AAS degree. A study of the project management processes used in the design and construction of civil engineering projects. Topics include the roles and responsibilities of project participants, project delivery methods, engineering and construction contracts, project control and documentation, and dispute resolution mechanisms. (Spring)
CMET 3680. Professional Development III. (1) Prerequisite: Open to junior level Construction Management majors. Seminar discussing professional development issues relating to the civil engineering technology and construction management professions. One hour per week. Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. (Spring)
CMET 4073. Special Topics – Construction Management. (1-4) Prerequisite: senior standing and permission of instructor. A study of new and emerging technical topics pertinent to the field of construction management. May be repeated for credit. (On demand)
CMET 4125. Construction Codes and Contract Documents. (2) Prerequisites: Junior Standing or AAS degree. An analysis of construction contract documents, building codes, permits, and specifications. (Fall)
CMET 4127. Construction Law and Regulatory Issues. (3) Examination of the legal problems encountered by architects, engineers, contractors, owners, sureties, and lenders involved in the construction process. Special emphasis on the legal rights and liabilities of the various participants in construction projects. Claims preparation, negotiation, arbitration, and litigation methods of dispute resolution. (On demand)
CMET 4228. Construction Office Operations. (2) Prerequisite: CMET 3224. A study of management issues encountered in home and job-site office operations. Topics include construction safety, insurance and risk management, labor relations, procurement, cost accounting, subcontracting, and labor and equipment resource allocation and management. (Spring)
CMET 4272. Capstone Project. (2)  Prerequisite: Senior standing in Construction Management and permission of the department. Utilization of students’ previous course work to creatively investigate and produce solutions for a comprehensive construction management project. (Spring)
CMET 4680. Professional Development IV. (1) Prerequisite: Open to senior level Construction Management majors. Seminar discussing professional development issues relating to the civil engineering technology and construction management professions. One hour per week. Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. (Spring)
COMM 1101. Public Speaking. (3)  For students who want to upgrade their oral communication skills. Opportunity to study theory and practice of public speaking. Special emphasis placed on constructing and delivering speeches. Restricted to Pre- Communication Studies majors and minors, English majors, Pre-Elementary Education, Elementary Education, Pre-Kinesiology majors, Athletic Training, Exercise Science, and Pre-Public Health majors (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
COMM 1107. Introduction to Communication Contexts. (3) A survey of the nature and practice of communication in interpersonal, small group, intercultural, organizational, public relations, and mass communication contexts. (On demand)
COMM 2100. Introduction to Communication Theory. (3) Introduces students to traditional and contemporary theories about human communication processes including the nature of theory building, and major theoretical developments within the field of communication. Restricted to Pre-Communication Studies majors and minors, Pre-Public Health, Public Health, and Software and Information Systems majors. (Fall, Spring) (May not be taken more than twice.) COMM 2101. Introduction to Rhetorical Theory. (3) Evolution of rhetorical theory from ancient to modern times and examination of major rhetorical theorists. Emphasis on using rhetorical theory to better understand contemporary persuasive messages. Restricted to Communication Studies majors and minors. (Fall, Spring)
COMM 2102. Advanced Public Speaking. (3) Prerequisite: COMM 1101 or permission of the instructor. Advanced theory and practice of speaking in public. Research, composition, and delivery of various types of speeches and presentations. Restricted to Communication Studies majors and minors. (Fall, Spring)
COMM 2103. Argumentation and Debate. (3) Introduction to the basic theory and skills of argumentation and debate. Assumptions of argumentation, evidence, reasoning, argument construction, cross-examination, refutation, and ethics included. Restricted to Communication Studies majors and minors. (Fall)
COMM 2105. Small Group Communication. (3) Principles of discussion and deliberation in small groups. Practice in organizing, leading, and participating in various forms of group communication. Emphasis on problem solving and group management. Restricted to Communication Studies majors and minors, Computer Science, Software and Information Systems, Pre-Public Health, and Public Health majors. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
COMM 2107. Interpersonal Communication. (3) Study of the dynamics of one-to-one human communication. The relation of language to human communication, perception and reality, self-concept, nonverbal communication codes, development of trust and self-disclosure, and development of positive communication style. Restricted to Communication Studies majors and minors, Pre-Elementary Education, Elementary Education, Pre-Public Health, and Public Health majors. (Fall, Spring)
COMM 2110. Women and the Media. (3) Crosslisted as WGST 2110. Examination of messages about women as conveyed in contemporary media (magazines, newspapers, videos, the Internet, video games, television, and movies.) The role of gender in the power structures of the media producers is also analyzed. (Fall)
COMM 2120. Black Images in the Media. (3) Crosslisted as AFRS 2105. Examination of African- American images projected through electronic and print media, historically and currently. (Yearly)
COMM 2145. Principles of Public Relations. (3) Preor corequisite: JOUR 2100. Prerequisite: Restricted to Communication Studies majors and minors. Familiarize students with basic concepts and principles of public relations within the context of communication theory. Acquaints students with the history, functions, roles, social contexts, tools, techniques, and strategies of the profession. (Fall, Spring)
COMM 3050. Topics in Communication Studies. (3) Prerequisite: COMM 1101. Timely and important areas relevant to communication studies. May be repeated for credit with permission of the major advisor. (On demand)
COMM 3051. Topics in Health Communication. (3) Prerequisite: COMM 3115. Timely and important areas relevant to the study of health communication. May be repeated for credit with permission of the major advisor. (On demand)
COMM 3052. Topics in Mass Media. (3) Timely and important areas relevant to the study of the mass media. May be repeated for credit with permission of the major advisor. (On demand)
COMM 3054. Topics in Organizational Communication. (3) Prerequisite: COMM 3141. Timely and important areas relevant to the study of organizational communication. May be repeated for credit with permission of the major advisor. (On demand)
COMM 3055. Topics in Public Relations. (3) Prerequisite: COMM 2145. Timely and important areas relevant to the study of public relations. May be repeated for credit with permission of the major advisor. (On demand)
COMM 3100. Communication Research Methods. (3)  Prerequisites: COMM 2100 and STAT 1220 or 1222. Methods for systematic investigation of communication behavior in all primary communication contexts, including utilization of library materials and quantitative and qualitative techniques for data analysis. Restricted to Communication Studies majors. (Fall, Spring)
COMM 3101. Persuasion. (3) Prerequisite: COMM 2101. Emphasis on the theory and practice of persuasion. Topics include attitude modification, theories of persuasion, source credibility, persuasive strategies, ethics, and audience analysis. Restricted to Communication Studies majors. (Fall, Spring)
COMM 3110. Gender and Communication. (3) Cross-listed as WGST 3110. Examination of the relationship between language and gender. Topics covered include how language shapes perceptions of men/women; gender differences in verbal and nonverbal communication; and gendered communication in relationships, friendships, and the workplace. (Spring)
COMM 3115. Health Communication. (3) Prerequisites: COMM 2100 or HLTH 2101. This course is designed to provide a broad introduction to human communication in a health-care context. Emphasis will be on issues of social support, patienthealth professional/caregiver interaction, organizational culture, planning health promotion campaigns, and cultural conceptions of health and illness. Restricted to Communication Studies majors and minors, Pre-Public Health, and Public Health majors and Interdisciplinary Health Studies minors. (Spring)
COMM 3120. Communication and Mass Media. (3) Prerequisite: COMM 2100. A survey of the function and history of print and electronic media as forms of communication, their influence upon society, and the legal and economic environments in which they operate. Restricted to Communication Studies majors and minors. (Fall, Spring)
COMM 3121. Mass Communication and Society. (3) Examines important issues involving mass communication. Critical study of the effect mass communication exacts on society. (On demand)
COMM 3125. New Media for Communications. (3) Examines the theoretical perspectives and practical skills necessary to create and design content using digital tools. Course covers components of digital media including designing, writing and communication through the web, creating and editing online podcasts and original creation of online digital video. (Fall, Spring)
COMM 3126. Globalization and Digital Media. (3) Cross-listed as INTL 3115. An analysis of the role and impact of digital media on globalization. The course considers how the internet and social networks have changed our connection from a physical global society to a virtual culture and explores the ways in which digital communication has fostered the globalization of artistic styles, cultural forms, political relationships and economic transactions. (Yearly)
COMM 3130. Communication and Public Advocacy. (3) Prerequisites: COMM 2100. Examination of how symbols are used in public advocacy from both applied and theoretical perspectives with emphasis on rhetorical uses of language and non-verbal symbols in the creation and transmission of public messages. Restricted to Communication Studies majors and minors, Pre-Public Health, and Public Health majors. (Fall, Spring)
COMM 3131. African-American Oratory. (3) Oratory by African-Americans using in-depth study of speech texts and video and general rhetorical principles to examine historic as well as lesser known speeches. (On demand)
COMM 3135. Leadership, Communication, and Group Dynamics. (3) Study of leadership theories, behaviors, and group processes. Emphasis on group dynamics in organizations and the role of the leader. Assessment of leadership style. (Fall)
COMM 3136. Leadership, Service, and Ethics. (3) The focus of this course is on leadership issues facing our society, the role of values and ethics in leadership, and servant leadership. (Fall, Spring)
COMM 3141. Organizational Communication. (3) Prerequisites: COMM 2100. Examines the importance of the operation of communication processes within organizations and between organizations and their environments. Restricted to Communication Studies majors and minors, Pre- Public Health, Public Health, and Software and Information Systems majors. (Fall, Spring)
COMM 3142. Applications in Organizational Communication. (3) Prerequisite: COMM 3141 or permission of the instructor. This course applies the principles, theory and concepts of organizational communication to organizational settings. This course further explores how organizational theories are realized in everyday organizational life through case studies, interviews, various research methodologies, assessments, and evaluations. Restricted to Communication Studies majors. (Fall, Spring)
COMM 3150. Gender, Culture, and Communication. (3) Cross-listed as ANTH 3160. Addresses cultural experiences of gender through communication; material covered includes cultural constructions of femininity and masculinity, cultural socialization toward gender and sexuality, gendered communication in private and public settings, popular representations of gender and sexuality in U.S. media, and language diversity based upon ethnicity, class, gender, and sexual orientation. (On demand)
COMM 3245. Public Relations Writing. (3) Prerequisites: JOUR 2160 and COMM 2145. Instruction and writing practice designed to develop the professional-level writing skills expected of entrylevel public relations practitioners. Extensive writing exercises in preparing plans, releases, newsletters, brochures, web pages, media kits and other public relations products. Individual and group projects required. Restricted to Communication Studies majors. (Fall, Spring)
COMM 3246. PR Strategy. (3) Prerequisites: COMM 2145. This course focuses on the planning, problem-solving, and management skills required in the contemporary practice of public relations. Students will analyze a variety of public relations models and will learn to develop problem statements, goals, objectives and tactics, identify and research target publics, and evaluate strategic program results. Restricted to Communication Studies majors. (Fall, Spring)
COMM 3403. Debate Practicum. (2) Prerequisites: COMM 2103 or equivalent and permission of instructor. Application of debate principles and practices as a member of UNC Charlotte Debate Team. Research, argument construction and tournament competition required. Can be repeated four times. No more than four hours of COMM 3403 may be used toward requirements for the minor. (Fall, Spring)
COMM 3880. Independent Study. (1-3) Prerequisites: COMM 1101, permission of instructor and major advisor. Area of study beyond the scope of current offerings to be devised by student and faculty member. May be repeated. Three hours of COMM 3880 may be used toward the minor with prior approval of the Departmental Chairperson. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
COMM 4050. Topics in Communication Studies. (3) Timely and important areas relevant to communication studies. May be repeated for credit with permission of the major advisor. (On demand)
COMM 4101. Media and the Law. (3) Prerequisite: At least junior standing or permission of instructor. Survey of legal rights, restrictions, and ethical considerations in field of communication including the First Amendment, libel, invasion of privacy, obscenity law, regulation of electronic media, relationships between media and judiciary. Restricted to Communication Studies majors. (Fall, Spring)
COMM 4102. Federal Interpretation of the First Amendment. (3) Prerequisite: At least junior standing or permission of instructor. In-depth case analysis of tests determining Constitutional boundaries of expression, including clear and present danger, prior restraints, fighting words/symbolic speech, strict scrutiny, obscenity, indecency. (On demand)
COMM 4115. Seminar in Health Communication. (3) Prerequisite: COMM 3115, senior standing, and Communications Studies majors only. Course provides in-depth examination of a major area of health communication utilizing extensive readings, discussion and written work. (Fall, Spring)
COMM 4141. Advanced Organizational Communication. (3) Prerequisite: COMM 3142. Critical examination of the communication practices of organizations which accomplish such tasks as establishing organizational identification, influencing organizational members, and making decisions. Includes application of research methods to assess and analyze an organization's communication practices. Restricted to Communication Studies majors. (Fall, Spring)
COMM 4145. Communication Campaigns. (3) Prerequisites: COMM 3245 and COMM 3246. Lectures, workshops, and guest speakers provide knowledge to enable students to research, design, implement, and complete public relations projects for community-based, not-for-profit organizations. The class is structured and run in a manner similar to a professional public relations agency with students assuming appropriate agency roles. May be repeated once. Restricted to Communication Studies majors. (Fall, Spring)
COMM 4147. International Public Relations. (3) Prerequisite: COMM 2145. Course examines the complexities of public relations practice in an international setting. Includes overview of the factors that complicate communication across cultures and borders and an examination of the effect those factors have on public relations practice in specific global regions. Restricted to Communication Studies majors. (Yearly)
COMM 4410. Professional Internship. (3 or 6) Prerequisites: Junior or Senior standing, Communication Studies majors or minors, Journalism minors, 2.0 GPA in all course work in the major or minor. Students work 8-10 hours per week (total 120 hours per semester) for 3 credit hours, or 16-20 hours (total 240 hours per semester) for 6 credit hours in an approved placement. With permission of the student’s advisor and the Communication Studies Internship Coordinator, the course may be repeated for credit in a different internship placement. Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
DANC 1210. Ballet for Majors I. (2) Prerequisite: Dance major or minor or permission of instructor. Beginning Ballet Technique. May be repeated for credit. A grade of C or above is required to move to DANC 2210. Three contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
DANC 1211. Modern Dance for Majors I. (2) Prerequisite: Dance major or minor or permission of instructor. Beginning Modern Dance Technique. May be repeated for credit. A grade of C or above is required to move to DANC 2211. Three contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
DANC 1212. Ballet I. (2) Fundamentals of ballet technique, barre and floor work. May be repeated for credit. Three contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
DANC 1213. Ballet II. (2) Prerequisite: DANC 1212 or permission of instructor. Continuation of DANC 1212. May be repeated for credit. Three contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
DANC 1214. Modern Dance I. (2) Combination of improvisation, elementary modern styles. May be repeated for credit. Three contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
DANC 1215. Modern Dance II. (2) Prerequisite: DANC 1214 or permission of instructor. Continuation of DANC 1214. May be repeated for credit. Three contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
DANC 1280. Improvisation. (2) Prerequisite/ corequisites: DANC 1210, DANC 1211. Exploring body movement in time and space using different energies and relationships in order to understand how movement becomes a language of expression for composing original dances. Three contact hours. (Spring)
DANC 2119. Anatomy for Dancers. (3) Study and application of basic anatomy and kinesiology principles to dance. Three contact hours. (Fall)
DANC 2210. Ballet for Majors II. (2) Beginning/Intermediate Ballet Technique. Prerequisite: DANC 1210, or permission of instructor. May be repeated for credit. A grade of C or above is required to move to DANC 3210. Three contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
DANC 2211. Modern Dance for Majors II. (2) Beginning/Intermediate Modern Dance Technique. Prerequisite: DANC 1211, or permission of instructor. May be repeated for credit. A grade of C or above is required to move to DANC 3211. Three contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
DANC 2216. Choreography I. (3) Prerequisites: DANC 1280, DANC 1210, and DANC 1211, or permission of instructor. Exploration of fundamental elements, concepts, and crafting tools for composing dance. Four contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
DANC 2222. Ballet III. (2) Prerequisite: DANC 1213 or permission of instructor. Intermediate ballet; barre and centerwork. May be repeated for credit. Three contact hours. (On demand)
DANC 2224. Modern Dance III. (2) Prerequisite: DANC 1215 or permission of instructor. Intermediate modern dance technique. May be repeated for credit. Three contact hours. (On demand)
DANC 2226. Vintage Jazz Dance. (2) An introduction to the style and cultural context of an indigenous U.S. dance form that evolved in the first half of the 20th century. May be repeated for credit. Three contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
DANC 2227. Contemporary Jazz Dance. (2) Selected contemporary jazz styles from the 20th and 21st centuries. Dance majors/minors only; others by permission of the instructor. May be repeated for credit. Three contact hours. (On demand)
DANC 2228. Music and Dance. (2) Prerequisite: DANC 1210, DANC 1211. Basic music fundamentals and materials for dancers that explore the intellectual, affective, and physical relationship of dance to music through the study of the rhythmic structure. Music and dance compositional forms as they evolved historically provide examples and models for study. (3 contact hours) (Fall)
DANC 2402. Performance Practicum. (1) Prerequisite: Audition. Corequisite: Any dance technique course. Technique class must be taken concurrently. Practical application of performance techniques within a production setting, including auditions, rehearsals and performances. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
DANC 3201-3202. Professional Training Certificate in Dance. (8) Prerequisite: By audition only, or permission of the department. Both courses must be taken sequentially during the same academic year. First year of a two-year program of pre-professional technical dance training in ballet, performance experience, and professional dance company observation with the North Carolina Dance Theatre. Emphasis on adagio vocabulary and partnering skills. (Fall, Spring)
DANC 3210. Ballet for Majors III. (2) Intermediate/Advanced Ballet Technique. Prerequisite: DANC 2210, or permission of instructor. May be repeated for credit. Three contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
DANC 3211. Modern Dance for Majors III. (2) Intermediate/Advanced Modern Dance Technique. Prerequisite: DANC 2211, or permission of instructor. May be repeated for credit. Three contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
DANC 3221. Dance History I. (3) Historical and cultural developments of theatrical/concert dance from the Renaissance to the 20th century. (Fall)
DANC 3222. Dance History II. (3) Historical and cultural influences affecting the development of concert dance in the Twentieth Century. (Spring)
DANC 3230. Choreography II. (3) Prerequisites: DANC 2211 and 2216. Methods and sources for dance composition, culminating in creative experience. May be repeated for credit. Four contact hours. (Alternate Fall, Odd years)
DANC 4001. Topics in Dance. (1-3) Special topic in dance. May be repeated for credit with change in topic. Two to six contact hours. (On demand)
DANC 4110. Writing for Dance. (3)  Prerequisite: DANC 3222 and senior standing. Concert Dance and related professional communication are used as a basis for discussion and writing. Majors only. (Fall, Spring on demand)
DANC 4201-4202. Professional Training Certificate in Dance. (8) Prerequisites: DANC 3202 and audition. Both courses must be taken sequentially during the same academic year. Continuation of DANC 3201-3202 with emphasis on allegro vocabulary, and technical precision of complex combinations. DANC 4227. Dance Education Methods I. (3) Prerequisites: DANC 1202 or permission of instructor. Corequisite: DANC 4227L. Creative movement theories; techniques and skills for teaching the elementary school child. (Fall)
DANC 4227L. Elementary Clinical Experience. (1) Corequisite: DANC 4227. Observation and teaching in an elementary school setting. Application of methodologies introduced in DANC 4227. Two contact hours. (Fall)
DANC 4257. Dance Education Methods II. (3) Prerequisite: DANC 1202 or permission of instructor. Corequisite: DANC 4257L. Experiences in techniques for teaching dance in secondary schools. (Spring)
DANC 4257L. Secondary Clinical Experience. (1) Corequisite: DANC 4257. Observation and teaching in a secondary school setting. Application of methodologies introduced in DANC 3257. Two contact hours. (Spring)
DANC 4400. Internship in Dance (3-6) Prerequisite: GPA of at least 2.5, junior status, and permission of department chair. Research and/or inservice training for dance majors and minors in cooperating organizations. Specific content is based upon a contract between the students department and professional organization. Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
DANC 4467. Student Teaching/Seminar: K-12 Fine and Performing Arts: Dance. (15)  Prerequisite: approved application for student teaching; senior status; completion of professional education requirements; grades of C or better in all courses required for licensure. Corequisite: enrollment only in student teaching. A planned sequence of experiences in the student’s area of specialization conducted in an approved school setting under the supervision and coordination of a University supervisor and a cooperating teacher in which the student demonstrates the competencies identified for his/her specific teaching field in an appropriate grade level setting. (Fall, Spring)
DANC 4601. Individual Project. (1-6) Prerequisite: Permission of department chair. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ECGR 2103. Computer Utilization in C++. (3) An introduction to the use of computers and computing methods to solve engineering problems. Structures and object-oriented programming design using C++. ECGR 2111. Network Theory I. (3) Prerequisites: MATH 1242 and PHYS 2101 both with a grade of C or better. Pre- or corequisites: MATH 2171 and PHYS 2102, or permission of the department. Introduction to Kirchoff's laws and terminal equations. Circuit analysis techniques and network theorems. Singularity functions and signals. Transient and natural response of first and second order networks. State variable analysis. ECGR 2112. Network Theory II. (3) Prerequisites: ECGR 2111, MATH 2171, and PHYS 2102, all with a grade of C or better. Continuation of ECGR 2111. Introduction to sinusoidal steady state. Time frequency domain analysis. Power and energy. Two port networks. Fourier series. Introduction to Fourier and Laplace transforms. ECGR 2155. Instrumentation and Networks Laboratory. (1)  Prerequisites: MATH 1242 with a grade of C or better. Pre- or corequisite: ECGR 2111 or permission of department. Network measurements and applications, introduction to laboratory equipment and techniques. ECGR 2156. Logic and Networks Laboratory. (1)  Prerequisites: ECGR 2155. Pre- or corequisites: ECGR 2112 and 2181 or permission of department. Experimental logic design, network measurements, applications, and instrumentations. ECGR 2161. Basic Electrical Engineering I. (3) Prerequisite: PHYS 2102 with a C or better. Fundamental concepts and methods of analysis of D.C. and A.C. circuits, elementary operation of electronic devices. Not open to Electrical and Computer Engineering majors. ECGR 2181. Logic Systems Design I. (3) Prerequisite: MATH 1242 with a grade of C or better or permission of the department. Introduction to Boolean algebra; mixed logic; design of combinational circuits; introduction to sequential systems; MSI building blocks; includes laboratory design projects. ECGR 2252. Electrical Engineering Design I. (2)  Prerequisites: ECGR 2111 and ECGR 2155 or equivalents. Pre- or corequisites: ECGR 2112 and ECGR 2181 or equivalents. Introduction to the electrical engineering design process including teamwork, design specifications, conceptual design, detailed design, design integration, cost estimation and market considerations. Product design projects are completed and laboratory prototypes are developed and tested by design teams. Oral presentations and written technical reports on the design projects are required. ECGR 2255. Digital Design Laboratory. (2) Prerequisites: ECGR 2155 and ECGR 2181. Experiments in Digital Systems Design including the use of Programmable Logic Devices. Upper division engineering courses (3000 level and above) used to satisfy degree requirements within the College of Engineering are restricted to majors and minors of the College of Engineering. ECGR 3090. Special Topics in Electrical Engineering. (1-4) Prerequisite: Permission of the department. The course builds upon and synthesizes knowledge from the engineering science, mathematics, and physical sciences stem of the core curriculum. The specific topics teach engineering analysis, synthesis, and design, while simultaneously affording an opportunity for the students to investigate an area of specialization. May be repeated for credit. ECGR 3111. Signals and Systems. (3) Prerequisite: ECGR 2112 with a grade of C or better. Analysis of continuous-time signal and systems. Input-output relationships of linear time-invariant systems. Transient and steady state analysis. Frequency domain descriptions and Fourier analysis. Analysis and characterization of LTI systems using Laplace transforms. ECGR 3112. System Analysis II. (3) Prerequisite: ECGR 3111 with a grade of C or better. A continuation of ECGR 3111 emphasizing system response characteristics in the frequency domain. Introduction to techniques of analysis of continuous and discrete systems. ECGR 3121. Introduction to Electromagnetic Fields. (3) Prerequisites: ECGR 2112 with a grade of C or better. A study of electric and magnetic fields using the vector formulation. Vector analysis. Electrostatics: potential functions, dielectrics, capacitance, energy, and forces associated with electric fields, solution of Laplance’s and Poisson’s equations. Magnetostatics: vector potential functions, Lorentz forces, hysteresis, magnetic polarization and induction, and energy. Gauss’s, Ampere’s, Faraday’s laws, etc., leading to the Maxwell’s equations. ECGR 3122. Electromagnetic Waves. (3) Prerequisite: ECGR 3121 with a grade of C or better. A study of Maxwell's equations, transmission line theory, plane waves in media, propagation of electromagnetic waves in various media. The phenomena of reflection and refraction at interfaces of two dissimilar materials. Guided electromagnetic waves in coaxial cables and waveguides. ECGR 3123. Data Communications and Networking. (3) Prerequisites: ECGR 2111 and ECGR 2181. An introduction to data communications, including transmission media, signal encoding, link control, and multiplexing. Concepts of networking including protocols, LAN, WAN, and wireless networks. ECGR 3131. Fundamentals of Electronics and Semiconductors. (3) Prerequisite: ECGR 2112 with a grade of C or better. Study of the fundamental concepts and applications of semiconductor devices. Diode characteristics and applications, including clipping and rectifier circuits. MOS, JFET, and bipolar transistor fundamentals, including D.C. biasing and small-signal analysis of single-stage amplifiers. Operational amplifier fundamentals. ECGR 3132. Electronics. (3) Prerequisites: ECGR 3131 with a grade of C or better. Low and highfrequency analysis of transistor amplifiers. Multistage and feedback amplifier design. Stability and oscillation. Operational amplifier design and applications. ECGR 3133. Solid State Microelectronics I. (3) Prerequisites: ECGR 3121 and PHYS 3141, or permission of the department. Simple crystal structures, energy bands, and charge carriers in semiconductors, distribution functions for photons and electrons, optical and electrical properties, carrier diffusion, generation, and recombination. ECGR 3134. Industrial Electronics. (3) Prerequisite: ECGR 3132 with a grade of C or better. High power solid state circuits. Topics include choppers, phase controlled rectifiers, triggering devices, inverters and dual converters, limiting and regulating circuits. ECGR 3142. Electromagnetic Devices. (3) Prerequisite: ECGR 3121 with a grade of C or better. Principles of operation and basic design features of electromechanical energy converters. The role of the magnetic field in transformers and electrical machines. Generation of induced voltages. Electromagnetic torque development. Speed control. Circuit models and machine performance. ECGR 3155. Systems and Electronics Laboratory. (1)  Prerequisites: ECGR 2112 and ENGR 2156. Pre- or corequisites: ECGR 3111 and ECGR 3131, or permission of the department. Systems and signals measurements and applications; electronic circuits. ECGR 3156. Electromagnetic and Electronic Devices Laboratory. (1)  Prerequisite: ECGR 3155. Pre- or corequisite: ECGR 3132 or permission of the department. Measurements and applications of electromagnetic and solid state devices. ECGR 3157. Electrical Engineering Design II. (2)  Prerequisites: ECGR 2112, ECGR 2252, and ECGR 2181. Pre- or corequisites: ECGR 3111 and ECGR 3131, or permission of the department. Application of conceptual design; circuit design; parameter sensitivity analysis; cost-performance tradeoff analysis and interconnection compatibility design. A design project completed in a laboratory setting and a written technical report and oral presentation on the project are required. ECGR 3159. Professional Practice. (2) Prerequisite: Senior standing in engineering. Ethics; safety and liability in the manufacturing workplace; product design; product development; cost estimating for nonrecurring engineering work; production planning; Total Quality Management; and effective technical presentation. ECGR 3181. Logic System Design II. (3) Prerequisite: ECGR 2181 with a grade of C or better or permission of the department. Digital systems design and test. Top-down design of multi-input based controller systems; programmable logic devices. ECGR 3182. Digital Electronics. (3) Prerequisites: ECGR 3131 and ECGR 3181, both with a grade of C or better. Bipolar and field-effect transistors, switching characteristics, device models, logic families. Memory devices, one-shots, Schmitt triggers, logic gates, drivers. Use of logic analyzers. ECGR 3183. Computer Organization and Programming Languages. (3) Prerequisites: ECGR 3181 and ITCS 1215. Introduction to key concepts in computer organization. Microprocessor design, assembly language programming, C programming, input/output, interrupts and traps, structured program development, parsers/interpreters/compilers. Emphasis on application of these concepts to computer engineering systems including microcomputers and embedded systems. ECGR 3253. Senior Design I. (2) (W, O) Prerequisites: Senior standing in engineering, ECGR 2155, ECGR 2156, ECGR 3111, and ECGR 3131, all with a grade of C or better. A project-oriented course stressing the planning and design of experiments to support the student’s project. Formation of the design problem and specification. ECGR 3254. Senior Design II. (3) (W, O) Prerequisite: ECGR 3253 with a grade of C or better. A continuation of ECGR 3253 consisting of project development and analysis, culminating in a written and oral presentation. ECGR 3695. Electrical Engineering Cooperative Education Seminar. (1) Prerequisites: ENGR 3590 and permission of the ECE department's co-op advisor. Required for co-op students during semesters immediately following each work assignment for presentation of engineering reports on work done the prior semester. Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory grading is used. May be repeated for credit. ECGR 3890. Individualized Study. (1-3) Prerequisite: Permission of the department. Supervised individual study within an area of a student's particular interest which is beyond the scope of existing courses. May be repeated for credit. ECGR 3990. Undergraduate Research. (1-4) Prerequisite: Permission of the department. This course involves the independent study of theoretical and/or experimental problems in the specialized area of engineering analysis and design. The student can pursue some particular area or problem to a depth much greater than can be undertaken within the scope of existing courses. May be repeated for credit. ECGR 4090. Special Topics in Electrical Engineering. (1-4) Prerequisite: Permission of the department. Directed study of current topics of special interest. May be repeated for credit. ECGR 4101. Embedded Systems. (3) Prerequisite: ECGR 3183 or ITCS 3182. Introduction to designing microcontroller-based embedded computer systems using assembly and C programs. Examination of realtime operating systems and their impact on performance. Computer engineering applications will be emphasized. ECGR 4102. Engineering Simulation. (3) Prerequisite: ECGR 2103 or permission of the department. A wide range of simulation related topics will be introduced including the theory of simulation, characteristics of simulators, and trade-offs in simulation studies. Continuous and discrete simulation with primary emphasis on application of simulation techniques to engineering problems. Simulation of actual problems based on students' interest and experience areas. ECGR 4103. Applied Computer Graphics. (3) Prerequisite: Permission of the department. Interactive graphics; raster, character, vector, graphics, display technologies; rotation, scaling, translating of graphics image; image processing/enhancement; feature extraction; 3-D graphics; hidden lines. ECGR 4104. Computational Methods in Power Systems. (3) Prerequisite: ECGR 4142 or permission of the department. Numerical techniques for analysis, operation, and planning of power systems. Sparse matrix techniques applied to power flow algorithms. Economic operation of power systems. Optimum power flow. ECGR 4111. Control Systems Theory I. (3) Prerequisite: ECGR 3112 with a grade of C or better. Transfer functions, block diagrams, and signal flow graphs. Feedback control system characteristics. The performance and stability of feedback systems using root locus and frequency response methods. Time domain analysis of control systems. The design and compensation of control systems. ECGR 4112. Control Systems Theory II. (3) Prerequisite: ECGR 4111 with a grade of C or better. State space techniques and useful state space methods. System stability. Controllability and observability of linear systems. The formulation of the state equations for discrete-time systems and the analysis of these systems by matrices. Analysis of nonlinear systems. Optimal control systems studies. ECGR 4113. Modeling and Analysis of Dynamic Systems. (3) Prerequisite: ECGR 3111 or permission of the department. Models and dynamical properties of mechanical, thermal, and fluid systems, utilizing by analogy the properties of electrical circuit theory. Emphasis on the formulation of circuit models and the development of terminal equations of system components. Dynamic response to step, pulse, and sinusoidal driving functions using Laplace transforms. Sinusoidal steady-state and frequency response of systems. ECGR 4121. Antennas. (3) Prerequisite: ECGR 3122 with a grade of C or better or permission of the department. Radiation into free space, the point source, thin linear antenna, arrays of linear elements, aperture antennas, impedance, methods of feeding, matching and termination. Antenna systems. ECGR 4122. Acoustics. (3) Prerequisite: ECGR 3122 with a grade of C or better. Vibrations and simple vibrating systems; radiating systems; plane waves of sound, dynamic analogies, microphones and other acoustic transducers; acoustic measurements. ECGR 4123. Analog and Digital Communication. (3) Prerequisite: ECGR 3111 with a grade of C or better. Analysis and transmission of signals, including analog communication systems (amplitude and frequency modulation, effect of noise); digital communications systems (pulse code modulation, data transmission systems phase-shift keying, and frequency-shift keying, effect of noise). ECGR 4124. Digital Signal Processing. (3) Prerequisite: ECGR 3111 with a grade of C or better. Sampling and signal recovery in linear systems; analysis of sampled systems; discrete and fast Fourier transforms; z-transform; discrete convolution; design of digital FIR and IIR filters. ECGR 4125. Foundation of Optical Engineering. (3) Prerequisites: ECGR 3121 and PHYS 3141, both with a grade of C or better or permission of the department. The engineering aspects and applications of modern optics, optical communications, optical materials, optical devices, basic optical fiber and integrated optics, optical signals, and optical networks, basic Fourier optics, and methods in optical signal processing. Signal and data processing, principles of integrated optics. ECGR 4131. Linear Integrated Electronics. (3) Prerequisite: ECGR 3132 with a grade of C or better. Design of linear integrated circuits utilizing bipolar and MOS devices. Application in linear amplifier design, control, and processing of analog signals. ECGR 4132. Analog Integrated Circuits Design. (3) Prerequisite: ECGR 4131 with a grade of C or better or Permission of the department. Topics include analog MOS modeling, design of current mirrors, references, and operational amplifiers. Both hand analysis and SPICE simulation utilized. ECGR 4134. Solid State and Semiconductor Microelectronics II. (3) Prerequisites: ECGR 3133 with a grade of C or better or permission of the department. PN-junctions and Schottky junctions; bipolar and field effect transistors; optoelectronic and heterojunction devices; lithography and integrated circuits; microwave devices; light emitting devices and detectors; quantum devices using superlattices; quantum wells and quantum dots; material preparation and characterization; and measurement techniques. ECGR 4135. Physical Electronics. (3) Prerequisite: ECGR 3122 or PHYS 3181 or permission of the department. Dynamics of charged particles; electron motion in electromagnetic fields; types of electron emission; beam focusing; longitudinal and transverse beam waves; microwave generation; plasma parameters. ECGR 4137. Device Electronics for Integrated Circuits. (3) Prerequisites: ECGR 3132 with a grade of C or better or permission of the department. The basic operating principles of electronic devices in integrated circuits are treated. The physical models of these devices are discussed. Graduate students are required to carry out laboratory experimentation. ECGR 4138. Electronic Thin Film Materials and Devices. (3) Prerequisite: ECGR 3132 or ECGR 3133, both with a grade of C or better or permission of the department. Applications of thin films in microelectronics/optoelectronics manufacturing processes; vacuum technology, deposition techniques, and the characterization methods relevant to optoelectronic applications; thin film applications such as metallization, silicide formation, light emitting diodes (LED) and lasers, and doping of semiconductors. ECGR 4139. Digital Communication Systems. (3) Prerequisites: ECGR 2181 and ECGR 3131. Topics include digital data transmission systems, signal and system representation, digital system performance characterization, pulse code modulation, and statistical communications theory. ECGR 4140. Introduction to VLSI Processing. (3) Prerequisite: permission of the department. Microelectronic fabrication; relevant materials, processes, and tools; fabrication of a simple structure in the VLSI clean room/lab. ECGR 4141. Power System Analysis I. (3) Prerequisite: ECGR 3142 with a grade of C or better. Representation of power system components for analysis studies. Transmission line parameters. Network equations. Load flow analysis and numerical methods. ECGR 4142. Power System Analysis II. (3) Prerequisite: ECGR 4141 with a grade of C or better. Economic operation of power systems. Short circuit studies. Symmetrical components. Transient stability analysis. ECGR 4143. Electrical Machinery. (3) Prerequisite: ECGR 3142 with a grade of C or better. Advanced theory of transformers and rotating. Machines; harmonic and saturation effects on machine performance. Unbalanced operation and transient conditions. ECGR 4146. Introduction to VHDL. (3) Prerequisites: ECGR 3181 with a grade of C or better and knowledge of a computer language, or permission of the department. Introduction to VHSIC Hardware Description Language (VHDL) including VHDL-based high-level design of microelectronic systems, VHDL programming, and VHDL synthesis; emphasis on learning and using industry-standard VHDL tools. ECGR 4161. Introduction to Robotics. (3) Prerequisite: Senior standing. Modeling of industrial robots including homogeneous transformations, kinematics, velocities, static forces, dynamics, computer animation of dynamic models, motion trajectory planning, and introduction to vision, sensors, and actuators. ECGR 4162. Control of Robotic Manipulators. (3) Prerequisites: ECGR 4161 and ECGR 4111. Control of industrial robots including linear, nonlinear, and adaptive control of robot’s motion plus control of forces and torques exerted by the end-effector. Additional topics include computer animation of the controlled behavior of industrial robots, actuator and sensor types, robot vision, and control computer/robot interfacing. ECGR 4165. Laser Electronics I. (2) Prerequisites: ECGR 3121 and PHYS 3141, or permission of the department. Basic principles of quantum electronics, interaction of light with atoms, properties of laser light, and laser applications. Electromagnetic aspects of lasers, Maxwell’s Equations and beam, ray optics, matrix methods for the analysis and synthesis of optical systems. Laser resonator design, oscillation modes, mode frequency and stability. ECGR 4181. Computer Arithmetic. (3) Prerequisite: permission of the department. Principles, architecture, and design of fast two operand adders, multi-operand adders, standard multipliers and dividers. Cellular array multipliers and dividers. Floating point processes, BCD and excess three adders, multipliers and dividers. ECGR 4182. Digital System Testing. (3) Prerequisite: ECGR 3181 with a grade of C or better or permission of the department. System testing; Boolean difference; D-algorithm; checking experiments; redundancy, computer-aided digital test systems. ECGR 4183. Network Synthesis. (3) Prerequisite: ECGR 4113. The positive real concept, properties and methods of testing. Realizability conditions on driving point functions. Methods of synthesis of one-port. Physical realizability and properties of two-port networks. Transfer function synthesis. Approximation methods. ECGR 4184. Device Characterization, Parameterization and Modeling. (3) Prerequisite: ECGR 3132 permission of the department. Advance device and circuit analysis; device and circuit simulation using SPICE, ECAP or equivalent. Parametric modeling of active devices. Device characterization and parameterization; temperature effects; thermal cycling. Analysis of device failure modes. ECGR 4185. Electromagnetic Optics. (3) Prerequisites: ECGR 3122 or permission of the department. This course includes topics of electromagnetic wave in optical devices and optical systems. Electromagnetic wave propagation in dielectric media: optical waveguide, periodic structure, multi-layer dielectric, photonic crystals, anisotropic, and nonlinear materials. ECGR 4186. Optical Communication and Optical Signals. (3) Prerequisites: ECGR 4125 or permission of the department. The course covers the fundamentals of modern optical networks, optical systems, and protocols. These include transmission, detection, multiplexing/demultiplexing and related prevailing technology. ECGR 4187. Data Communications. (3) Prerequisite: Permission of the department. Principles of data communication; computer communications architecture (layering) with emphasis on the physical layer and data link layer, transmission media; analog and digital signal representation; data transmission basics; Shannon’s theorem; error detection/correction; data compression; point-to-point protocols; multiplexing. ECGR 4188. Advanced VLSI Systems Design. (3) Prerequisite: ECGR 4433. A project-oriented course dealing with advanced topics in VLSI systems design and analysis such as circuit design techniques, array structures, performance estimation, automated routing, and device electronics. ECGR 4190. Power Generation: Operation and Control. (3) Prerequisite: ECGR 4142 or permission of the department. Characteristics of power generation units, steam, nuclear reactor and hydroelectric. Economic and thermal system dispatch. Transmission losses, load flow problems. Hydro scheduling, hydro-plant models. Energy production cost models. Interchange evaluation. ECGR 4191. Dynamic and Transient Analysis of Power Systems. (3) Prerequisite: ECGR 4142 or permission of department. Large-scale systems state descriptions and hierarchical control. State space models, dynamic stability and testing. Stability of simple and multi-machine systems. Transient phenomena in electrical power systems. Transient stability problem. ECGR 4193. Experiments in Modern Optical Engineering. (3) Prerequisites ECGR 4125 and ECGR 4165 or permission of department. This course offers lectures and laboratory experiments in lasers, optical fiber, optical sensing, and optical signal processing. This course is offered as supplement to ECGR 4125 and ECGR 4165 with emphasis on hands on experiments, measurements, and design. ECGR 4222. Random Processes and Optimum Filtering. (3) Prerequisites: ECGR 3111 and STAT 3128 or permission of department. Review of probability, univariate and multivariate distribution functions; random processes, discrete and continuous time processes, widesense stationary, ergodicity; time- and frequency-domain analysis; linear systems, optimum filtering, Wiener filters, Kalman filters; application . ECGR 4231. Sensors & Actuators. (3) Prerequisite: ECGR 3121, ECGR 3132, or permission of department. Fundamentals of sensors and actuators, and their applications in smart machines, industry, metrology, and the environment. Materials for sensors, actuators, electronic and optical sensors, electroptics, magneto-optics, and fiber optics sensors, microsensors and actuators, sensors and actuators, signal processing and interfaces. ECGR 4261. Microwave Circuit Design I. (3) Prerequisites: ECGR 3131; and senior/graduate standing, or permission of department. Design and analysis of microwave devices and circuits; including microwave aspects of discrete active (i.e., field effect and bipolar transistors, etc.) and passive (i.e., microstrips, inductors, capacitors) components; device parameter extraction, using computer aided design (CAD) tools. ECGR 4265. Microwave Devices and Electronics. (3) Prerequisites: ECGR 3122 and PHYS 2102 with grades of C or better or permission of department. Microwave transmission line theory, parameters, microwave waveguides, microstrip line and components including resonators, slow-wave structures, tees, rings, couplers, circulators, isolators, and microwave tubes. Microwave solid state electronics, including microwave transistors, tunnel diodes, transferred electron devices, avalanche transit-time devices, and mono-lattice microwave integrated circuits. ECGR 4422. Random Processes and Optimum Filtering. (3) Prerequisites: ECGR 3111 and STAT 3128 or permission of department. Review of probability, univariate and multivariate distribution functions; random processes, discrete and continuous time precesses, widesense stationary, ergodicity; time-and frequency-domain analysis; linear systems, optimum filtering, Wiener filters, Kalman filters; application. ECGR 4433. VLSI Systems Design. (3) Prerequisites: ECGR 3131 and ECGR 3181, both with a grade of C or better or permission of the department. Analysis, design, and synthesis of very large scale integrated circuits. A project-oriented course relying heavily on computer-aided design tools for logic, layout design, and simulation. ECGR 4892. Individualized Study. (1-6) Individual investigation and exposition of results. May be repeated for credit. ECONOMICS (ECON) ECON 1090. Topics in Economics. (1-3) Consideration of topics from the areas of economic theory, economic development, consumer economics, welfare economics, and current economic problems. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (On demand)
ECON 1101. Economics for Non-Majors. (3) Economic issues without emphasis on theoretical models. Contemporary economic issues such as pollution control, health care, unemployment, and crime are studied. A student is ineligible to take this course if credit has already been received for either ECON 2101 or ECON 2102. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ECON 2101. Principles of Economics-Macro. (3) Scope and methodology of economics as a social science, the measurement of national income, the theory of national income determination, money and banking, monetary and fiscal policy, and international economics. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Fall Evenings)
ECON 2102. Principles of Economics-Micro. (3) Pricing mechanism of a market economy, the industrial organization of the U.S. economy, problems of economic concentration, the theory of income distribution, and comparative economic systems. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Spring Evenings)
ECON 3090. Topics in Economics. (3) Prerequisite: Permission of the department. Topics from the areas of economic theory, economic development, consumer economics, welfare economics, and current economic problems. May be repeated for credit. (On demand)
ECON 3105. Industrial Relations. (3) Prerequisite: introductory course in economics or permission of instructor. Systematic analysis of the sociological, economic, and legal forces affecting the work environment. Emphasis on labor unions and employment law. (On demand)
ECON 3106. Labor Economics. (3) Prerequisites: ECON 2101 and 2102. Economics of labor markets with emphasis on wage and employment theory, collective bargaining, and human capital theory. Historical and legal forces affecting labor markets. (Fall)
ECON 3107. Employment Law. (3) Cross-listed as MGMT 3243. Legal principles and legislation which control employment decisions in union and non-union settings. Topics include fair employment practices, anti-discrimination law, representation elections, unfair labor practices, and dispute settlement processes. (On demand)
ECON 3112. Econometrics. (3) Prerequisites: ECON 2101 and 2102, MATH 1120 or 1241, STAT 1220 and INFO 2130. Econometric techniques, including simple and multiple least squares regression with problems and analyses. (Fall, Summer)
ECON 3114. Research Methods. (3) Prerequisites: STAT 1220, INFO 2130, and ECON 3112. Introduction to research in economics, including major sources of data and information and application of elementary research methods to economic problems. (On demand)
ECON 3115. Money and Banking. (3) Prerequisite: ECON 2101. The characteristics and functions of money in the modern economy, monetary theory and policy, and financial institutions. (Fall)
ECON 3122. Intermediate Microeconomics. (3) Prerequisites: ECON 2101 and 2102 and MATH 1120 or 1241. Microeconomic analysis with emphasis on consumer theory and the theory of production. Resource allocation and the determination of optimum output and pricing by a firm operating under various market structures. Distribution and welfare theories. (Fall)
ECON 3123. Intermediate Macroeconomics. (3) Prerequisites: ECON 2101 and 2102 and MATH 1120 or 1241. Analysis of economic aggregates with inflation, unemployment, and income determination. Keynesian, Classical, Monetarist, and supply side models. (Spring)
ECON 3125. Managerial Economics. (3) Prerequisites: ECON 2102, MATH 1120 or 1241, STAT 1220, and INFO 2130. Economic decisions of particular interest to business firms, e.g., demand theory and forecasting; cost analysis and pricing policies. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
ECON 3131. Economic History of the United States. (3) Prerequisite: ECON 1101 or 2101 or 2102. Use of economic models to further understanding of the growth and development of the U.S. economy from colonial times to the Great Depression. Emphasis on the sources and consequences of American growth, with particular emphasis on technological, demographic, and institutional changes. (On demand)
ECON 3141. Health Economics. (3) Prerequisite ECON 2102. The application of microeconomic concepts to markets for health/medical care, including issues such as health care delivery, financing, regulation, and costs. (On demand)
ECON 3151. Law and Economics. (3) Prerequisite: ECON 2102. The application of microeconomic concepts to the law with an emphasis on examining the impact of laws on resource use, with the goal of using resources efficiently. The emphasis will be on property, contract, tort, and criminal law. (Fall)
ECON 3171. International Business Economics. (3) Prerequisite: ECON 2101 and 2102. Survey of international trade and international monetary theory including determination of international trade patterns, welfare implications of international trade and trade restrictions, economic integration, exchange rate determination, and the balance of payments. Credit will not be given for ECON 3171 where credit has already been given for ECON 4171 or 4172. (On demand)
ECON 3400. Economic Internship. (1-3) Prerequisites: Open to junior and senior Economics majors in good standing. Requires 50 hours of supervised employment per hour of credit and the completion of an academic project. Students must consult the department chair in advance of registration to discuss the availability of positions. A proposal form must be completed and approved prior to registration and the commencement of the work experience. Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. Cannot be taken for credit at the same time or following any other internship for credit and cannot be repeated. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ECON 3500. Cooperative Education and 49ership Experience. (0) Enrollment in this course is required for the department's Cooperative Education and 49ership students during each semester they are working in the position. Restricted to majors in the department of Economics. Participating students pay a course registration fee for transcript notation (49ership and co-op) and receive full-time student status (co-op only). Assignments must be arranged and approved in advance. Course may be repeated; evaluation is Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory. Only open to undergraduate students; Graduate level students are encouraged to contact their academic departments to inquire about academic or industrial internship options for credit. For more information, contact the University Career Center. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ECON 3895. Directed Individual Study. (1-3) Prerequisites: permission of the instructor and the department. Independent study of a theoretical and/or a policy problem in a special area of economics. Students may pursue a particular program in depth. Topics of the investigation may originate from the student or from the faculty member supervising the study. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
ECON 4100. Mathematical Economics. (3) Prerequisites: ECON 2101 and 2102 and MATH 1120 or 1241. Both microeconomic and macroeconomic problems are analyzed with quantitative techniques. Emphasis is given to the study of methods for mathematically formulating economic relationships including the tools used for finding maximums, minimums, and limits to single, recursive, and simultaneous economic relationships. Not available for credit in the M.S. program in Economics. (Spring)
ECON 4112. Econometrics II. (3) Cross-listed as ECON 6112. Prerequisite: ECON 3112 or permission of instructor. Tools of analysis are more extensive and of a greater depth than those studied in ECON 3112. Regression and correlation techniques are applied to economic and business problems derived from government and business environments. Not available for credit in the M.S. program in Economics. (On demand)
ECON 4116. Public Finance. (3) Prerequisite: ECON 3122. Revenue and expenditure problems of governmental units, intergovernmental financial relationships and the impact of federal fiscal policy upon the American economy. (On demand)
ECON 4117. Business and Economic Forecasting. (3) Prerequisite: ECON 3112. Analysis of fluctuations in economic activity, including production, employment, prices and industry sales. Topics include forecasting methods, business cycle theories, historical record, industry and sales forecasting. Not available for credit in the M.S. program in Economics. (Spring)
ECON 4135. Economics of Growth and Development. (3) Prerequisite: ECON 2102. Theories of economic growth and development applied to varying economic and social systems. Emphasis on current theoretical models of technological innovation and growth. (On demand)
ECON 4150. Urban and Regional Economics. (3) Prerequisite: ECON 2102. Spatial and economic organization of cities and regional areas and their special economic problems. Topics include economic growth, urban location and land use, poverty, housing, public finance, and urban transportation. (On demand)
ECON 4160. Economics of Transportation. (3) Prerequisite: ECON 2102. Analysis of transportation systems. Topics include the historical development of various modes, costs and rate-making, regulation and national transportation policy. (On demand)
ECON 4171. Economics of International Trade. (3) Prerequisite: ECON 3122, or ECON 3171 and ECON 2102, or permission from the instructor. Theory of international trade, including determination of international trade patterns, welfare implications of international trade, economic integration, and effects of tariffs and quotas. (On demand)
ECON 4172. Economics of International Finance. (3) Prerequisite: ECON 3123, or ECON 3171 and ECON 2102, or permission from the instructor. Survey of international monetary theory. Topics include exchange rate determination, balance of payments and adjustment, international liquidity, capital movements, international financial organizations, and monetary reform proposals. (Fall)
ECON 4177. History of Economic Thought. (3) Prerequisites: ECON 3122 and ECON 3123. One of the two courses may be taken as a corequisite. History of economics as a science and the evolution of theories of value, distribution and employment. Review of the works of Adam Smith, Thomas Malthus, David Ricardo, Karl Marx, Alfred Marshall, Thorstein Veblen, and John Maynard Keynes. (On demand)
ECON 4180. Industrial Organization and Public Policy. (3) Prerequisite: ECON 3122. An examination of monopolistic competition, oligopoly, and monopoly and questions of public policy in dealing with problems created by industrial concentration. (Spring, Summer)
ECON 4181. Energy and Environmental Economics. (3) Prerequisite: ECON 2102. Economic issues of both energy and environment. Energy issues include the historical development of energy resources, supply and demand considerations and projections of the future energy balance. Environmental issues are externalities, common property resources, and government regulation. Policy considerations include environmental standards, pollution charges, and property rights. Cost-benefit analysis and microeconomic theory are applied. (Spring)
EDUC 2100. Introduction to Education and Diversity in Schools. (3) Social, historical, and philosophical foundations of the educating professions, the organization and various levels of education, and the major issues in American education. Field-based activities in observing in-class and non-classroom settings: 5 hours. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
EDUC 2150. Human Development Across the Life Span. (3) Biological, psychological and social development throughout the life span. (On demand)
EDUC 3600. Teaching Fellows Seminar. (1) Prerequisite: Membership in good standing in the North Carolina Teaching Fellows Program. A discussion-oriented course in contemporary school issues led by the program’s faculty sponsors to cover Teaching Fellows Program expectations and prepare students to participate in required school, community, campus, and other enrichment activities. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
EDUC 3789. Seminar: Honors in Education. (3) Prerequisite: admission to the Honors in Education program. The seminar prepares honors students for a successful thesis by introducing them to the Honors in Education program and by helping them identify an appropriate committee chair and reader. The seminar also covers guidelines for preparing a thesis and appropriate thesis designs and themes. The course culminates in the presentation and defense of an acceptable honors proposal. (Spring)
EDUC 3790. Honors Thesis in Education. (3) Prerequisite: completion of EDUC 3789 with a grade of “C” or better. In this course honors students conduct their research and data analysis, and they write and defend their thesis before their honors committee. A grade of “A” is required for honors recognition from UNC Charlotte. The thesis must be approved and substantially completed (only minor, editorial revisions remain) prior to the student teaching seminar. (Fall)
EDUC 4290. Modifying Instruction for Learners with Diverse Needs in the Elementary School. (3) Prerequisite: admission to Teacher Education. Corequisite: enrollment in methods course(s) with field experience requirement. Strategies for adapting standard instruction to meet the learning needs of all members of elementary classrooms, including students at risk for school failure, individuals from culturally and linguistically diverse backgrounds, gifted learners, and students with disabilities. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
EDUC 4291. Modifying Instruction for Learners with Diverse Needs in Middle/Secondary Schools. (3) Prerequisites: MDSK 2100, MDSK 3151, and SECD 4140. Corequisites: READ 3255 and one of the following: MDSK 4251, MDSK 4253, ENGL 4254, or MAED 4252. Strategies for adapting standard instruction to meet the learning needs of all members of middle or secondary classrooms, including students at risk for school failure, individuals from culturally and linguistically diverse backgrounds, gifted learners, and students with disabilities. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
EIST 4100. Computer Applications in Education. (3) Computer systems and software for enhancing teaching, learning, and educational management; evaluating, selecting, and integrating courseware; focus on current PC operating system, word processing, database, spreadsheet, presentation, Internet, e-mail, and multimedia software. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
EIST 4135. Audiovisual Communications. (3) Prerequisite: Junior standing or departmental approval. Overview of traditional and emerging audiovisual media for education, training, marketing, and public relations, emphasizing knowledge and skills for evaluating, designing, producing, and using media such as photography, television, displays, interactive video, and microcomputers to enhance communication. (On demand)
EIST 4140. Educational Television. (3) Prerequisite: Junior standing or departmental approval. An examination of traditional and emerging applications of telecommunications media for teaching, training and informing. Investigation of published research and current strategies for evaluating the social and educational impact of television. Students will evaluate, design, produce, and utilize telecommunications media in micro-teaching settings for the enhancement of communication in their respective disciplines. (On demand)
ELED 3110. Instructional Design and the Use of Technology with Elementary School Learners. (3) Prerequisite: Admission to Teacher Education. Introduction to setting goals and objectives for instruction, various formats of lesson design, alignment between instructional objectives, activities, and assessments and the related use of technology in the development of effective and systematic learning environments; focused on current PC operating system, word processing, spreadsheet, presentation package, database, email, web browser, multimedia tools, and the Internet. (Fall, Spring)
ELED 3120. The Elementary School Child. (3) Prerequisite: Admission to Teacher Education. Child development theories and research findings, conceptual relationships between education and developmental paradigms, pathways of individual student development, child-centered and other types of educational reforms, the concept of developmental “needs” and the roles and responsibilities of school staff for meeting children’s developmental needs. Includes approximately 10 hours of field activities. (Fall, Spring)
ELED 3221. Teaching Science to Elementary School Learners. (3) Prerequisite: Admission to Teacher Education. Teaching strategies and materials appropriate for teaching inquiry science in grades K-6 with emphasis on using science process skills and content to develop effective science learning experiences for elementary school children. Includes 10 hours of field experiences. (Fall, Spring)
ELED 3223. Teaching Social Studies to Elementary School Learners. (3) Prerequisite: Admission to Teacher Education. Teaching strategies and materials for social studies in grades K-6 with emphasis on using social science content to develop effective social studies instructional plans for elementary school children. Includes 10 hours of field experiences in a classroom setting. (Fall, Spring)
ELED 3226. Teaching Language Arts to Elementary School Learners. (3)  Prerequisite: Admission to Teacher Education. Teaching of language arts in grades K-6, including how the study of language acquisition and growth informs and guides instructional practice. Emphasis on methods for fostering growth in speaking, listening, writing, and reading across the curriculum. Includes 10 hours of field experiences. (Fall, Spring)
ELED 3800. Individual Study in Elementary Education. (1-6) Prerequisite: Permission of the student’s advisor. Independent study under the supervision of an appropriate faculty member. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ELED 4121. Measuring and Evaluating Learning in the Elementary School Curriculum. (3) Prerequisite: Admission to Teacher Education. Planning for K-6 classroom measurement and evaluation based on objectives with emphasis on writing cognitive, affective, and psychomotor outcomes using an accepted system, and the development of teachermade tests and other types of classroom assessment, including objectives, essay, oral, performance, and portfolio evaluation. Includes 5 hours of field experiences. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ELED 4122. Research and Analysis of Teaching Elementary School Learners. (3) Prerequisite: Admission to Teacher Education. Concepts, methods, and practices used by effective teachers in their daily K-6 classroom routines with emphasis on classroom management and organization. Approximately 10 hours of field experience. (Fall, Spring)
ELED 4220. Integrating Curriculum for Elementary School Learners. (3) Prerequisite: Admission to Teacher Education. Curriculum planning and development skills with emphasis on relating school content and skills to societal and individual needs, designing and implementing integrated activities, and attending to the nature and functions of elementary schools. Includes 12 hours of field experiences. (Fall, Spring)
ELED 4255. CAMMP: Computer Applications and Manipulative Mathematics Programs. (3) Prerequisite: Admission to Teacher Education and permission of instructor. Examination of constructivism in K-8 mathematics teaching, with emphasis on concrete, representational and symbolic manipulatives; developmentally appropriate computer software. (Summer)
ELED 4420. Student Teaching/Seminar: K-6 Elementary Education. (15)  Prerequisites: Completion of all other course work and approved Application for Student Teaching. Planned sequence of experiences in the student’s area of specialization conducted in an approved school setting under supervision and coordination of a University supervisor and a cooperating teacher. Students must demonstrate the competencies identified for their specific teaching field in an appropriate grade-level setting. Approximately 35 to 40 hours per week in an assigned school setting and 10-12 on-campus seminars scheduled throughout the semester. (Fall, Spring)
ELET 1101. Simulation and Schematic Capture. (1) This course introduces computer-aided design and engineering (CAD/CAE) with an emphasis on applications in the electronics field. Topics include electronics industry standards (symbols, schematic diagrams, and layouts); drawing electronic schematics; simulating electronic circuits and printed circuit board layout of electronic circuits. Techniques for capturing CAD/CAE output to include with reports are also covered. This course meets for three (3) lab hours per week in a computer lab. (Fall)
ELET 1111. DC Circuits. (3) Corequisites: ELET 1101, ELET 1111L. Prerequisite or Corequisite: MATH 1100. This course is an introduction to electric circuits with an emphasis on DC circuit analysis and design. Topics include fundamental electrical and magnetic principles, circuit analysis laws and theorems, and component characteristics and behaviors. This course meets for three (3) lecture hours per week. (Fall)
ELET 1111L. DC Circuits Laboratory. (1) Corequisites: ELET 1101 and ELET 1111. This laboratory course supports concepts and practices covered in ELET 1111. This course meets for three (3) laboratory hours per week. (Fall)
ELET 1212. AC Circuits. (3) Prerequisites: ELET 1101, ELET 1111 and ELET 1111L with a grade of C or better. Corequisites: ELET 1212L and MATH 1103. This course is the continuation of an introduction to electric circuits with an emphasis on AC circuit analysis and design. Topics include application of electrical and magnetic principles, analysis laws and theorems in AC circuits, an introduction to frequency response and circuit behaviors under AC excitation. This course meets for three (3) lecture hours per week. (Spring)
ELET 1212L. AC Circuits Laboratory. (1) Prerequisites: ELET 1111 and ELET 1111L with a grade of C or better. Corequisite: ELET 1212. This laboratory course supports concepts and practices covered in ELET 1212. This course meets for three (3) laboratory hours per week. (Spring)
ELET 1231. Digital Circuits. (3) Prerequisites: ELET 1101, ELET 1111 and ELET 1111L with a grade of C or better. Corequisites: ELET 1231L. This course covers fundamental digital concepts including number systems, logic gates, Boolean algebra, Karnaugh Maps, and combinational logic. Topics include combinational digital circuit design and analysis, minimization methods, and hardware descriptor languages such as VHDL. This course meets for three (3) lecture hours per week. (Spring)
ELET 1231L. Digital Circuits Laboratory. (1) Prerequisites: ELET 1111 and ELET 1111L with a grade of C or better. Corequisite: ELET 1231. This laboratory course supports concepts and practices covered in ELET 1231. This course meets for three (3) laboratory hours per week. (Spring)
ELET 2121. Electronics I. (3) Prerequisites: ELET 1212 and ELET 1212L with a grade of C or better, MATH 1103. Corequisite: ELET 2121L. This course is an introduction to semiconductor electronic devices and circuits. Topics include semiconductor diodes, bipolar junction transistors (BJTs), field-effect transistors (FETs), ideal operational amplifiers and the application of these solid state devices in basic circuits and systems. This course meets for three (3) lecture hours per week. (Fall)
ELET 2121L. Electronics I Laboratory. (1) Prerequisites: ELET 1212 and ELET 1212L with a grade of C or better. Corequisite: ELET 2121. This laboratory course supports concepts and practices covered in ELET 2121. This course meets for three (3) laboratory hours per week. (Fall)
ELET 2141. Introduction to Power Systems. (3) Prerequisites: ELET 1212, ELET 1212L, and MATH 1103. This course is an introduction to electromagnetic fundamentals, power generation and distribution, ac and dc machines. This course meets for three (3) lecture hours per week. (Fall)
ELET 2201. C Programming. (3) This course is an introduction to the C programming language with an emphasis on applications in Electrical Engineering Technology. This course meets for three (3) lecture hours per week. (Spring)
ELET 2231. Microprocessor Fundamentals. (3) Prerequisite: ELET 1231. Corequisite: ELET 2201. This course covers application and design assembly and C language programming for AVR microprocessors. Topics include system timing, bus cycles, interrupts, stacks and subroutines. Upon completion, students should be able to design, program, verify, analyze, and troubleshoot AVR assembly and C language programs. This course meets for three (3) lecture hours per week. (Spring)
ELET 2241. Instrumentation and Controls. (3) Prerequisites: ELET 1212, ELET 1212L, and MATH 1103. Corequisite: ELET 2241L. This course is an introduction to instrumentation for measurement and control of physical variables, with an emphasis on electronic systems. Topics include a review of basic circuit analysis, electrical instruments, sensors and measurement principles and a survey of automatic controls from a systems point of view. This course is cross-listed as ETME 3163 and meets for three (3) lecture hours per week. (Spring)
ELET 2241L. Instrumentation Laboratory. (1) Prerequisites: ELET 1212 and ELET 1212L. Corequisite: ELET 2241. This laboratory course supports concepts and practices covered in ELET 2241. This course is cross-listed as ETME 3251 and meets for three (3) laboratory hours per week. (Spring)
ELET 3113. Network Analysis. (3) Prerequisites: ELET 1212 and ELET 1212L and with a grade of C or better, MATH 1121, and junior standing in department. This course is an introduction to frequency domain analysis through Laplace Transforms and Fourier Analysis. Topics include a review of circuit analysis fundamentals in the time domain, circuit transformations, waveform analysis and synthesis and first order natural and forced response with extensive utilization of circuit simulation software. This course meets for three (3) lecture hours per week. (Fall) (Internet)
ELET 3132. Digital Systems. (3) Prerequisites: ELET 1231 and ELET 1231L with a grade of C or better and junior standing in department. This course covers the design and implementation of digital systems. Topics include combinational and sequential digital circuits, minimization methods, state machine design and state assignment techniques, hardware descriptor languages such as VHDL, circuit implementation using MSI integrated circuits and programmable logic devices. This course meets for three (3) lecture hours per week. (Fall)(Internet)
ELET 3132L. Digital Systems Laboratory. (1)  Prerequisites: ELET 1231 and ELET 1231L with a grade of C or better and junior standing in department. Corequisite: ELET 3132 or permission of the department. This laboratory course supports concepts and practices covered in ELET 3132. This course meets for three (3) laboratory hours per week. (Fall, Summer)
ELET 3222. Electronics II. (3) Prerequisites: ELET 2121 and ELET 2121L with a grade of C or better and junior standing in department. This course is a continuation of the study of solid state devices begun in ELET 2121. Topics include frequency response of single and multistage amplifiers, feedback and stability, linear and nonlinear operational amplifier circuits, and CMOS and BiCMOS circuits with extensive utilization of circuit simulation software. This course meets for three (3) lecture hours per week. (Spring) (Internet)
ELET 3222L. Electronics II Laboratory. (1)  Prerequisites: ELET 2121 and ELET 2121L with a grade of C or better and junior standing in department. Corequisite: ELET 3222 or permission of the department. This laboratory course supports concepts and practices covered in ELET 3222. This course meets for three (3) laboratory hours per week. (Spring, Summer)
ELET 3232. Microcontroller Systems. (3) Prerequisites: ELET 2201 and ELET 2231. This course covers application and design of ARM (Advanced RISC Machine) systems. Topics include assembly and C language programming and an introduction to the control and interfacing of ARM based systems. Upon completion, students should be able to design, construct, program, verify, analyze and troubleshoot ARM assembly and C language programs and supporting hardware. This course meets for three (3) lecture hours per week. (Spring) (Internet)
ELET 4133. Embedded Systems. (3) Prerequisites: ELET 2231 and ELET 3132. This course covers the external characteristics of digital and analog integrated circuits and their applications when interfaced to embedded digital systems. Design constraints and considerations due to device limitations and device selection based upon application requirements will be discussed. Upon completion, students should be able to design, program, verify, analyze, and troubleshoot hardware and software in embedded systems. This course meets for three (3) lecture hours per week. (On demand) (Internet)
ELET 4142. Power Electronics/Networks. (3) Prerequisites: ELET 2141, ELET 3222 and ELET 3222L. This course is an introduction to power electronic devices in electrical systems, including their characteristics, operation and application. It also introduces topics on transmission of electric power with emphasis on modeling of power network components and systems, power flow studies and calculations. This course meets for three (3) lecture hours per week. (Fall) (Internet)
ELET 4151. Communication Systems. (3) Prerequisites: ELET 3222, ELET 3222L, and ETGR 3171. This course covers basic principles and concepts underlying modern communication systems. Topics include systems, signals, modulations (AM, FM, PM, FSK, PSK, QAM, PCM), transmission, reception, cellular, caller ID, and networks. This course meets for three (3) lecture hours per week. (Fall) (Internet)
ELET 4151L. Communication Systems Laboratory. (1)  Prerequisites: ELET 3222, ELET 3222L, and ETGR 3171. Corequisite: ELET 4151 or permission of the department. This laboratory course supports concepts and practices covered in ELET 4151. This course meets for three (3) laboratory hours per week. (Fall, Summer)
ELET 4152. Digital Signal Processing. (3) Prerequisite: ELET 3113. Discrete-time signals; discrete-time systems; Linear constant-coefficient difference equations; Periodic sampling; reconstruction from samples; changing the sampling rate; the z-transform; z-transform properties; transform analysis of linear time-invariant systems; digital filter design techniques; discrete Fourier Transform and the FFT algorithm. This course meets for three (3) lecture hours per week. (On demand)
ELET 4191. Applied Project Management. (2) Prerequisite: MATH 1100 and senior standing in department. Corequisite: ELET 4192. Statement of work, activity decisions, timelines, scheduling, and resource allocation methods. Techniques will be appropriate for large and small projects within commercial, academic, or non-profit organizations. This course meets for two (2) lecture hours per week. (Fall) (Internet)
ELET 4192. Senior Project I. (2)  Prerequisite: Senior standing in department. Corequisite: ELET 4191. This is the first of a two semester sequence in senior design. Students will utilize previous coursework to creatively investigate and produce solutions for a comprehensive practical engineering technology project. This course meets for two (2) lecture hours per week. Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. (Fall) (Internet)
ELET 4223. Active Filters. (3) Prerequisites: ELET 3222 and ETGR 3171. This course involves the design, analysis, simulation and implementation of composite, cascaded and summation filters. Topics include bilinear transfer functions; cascade design with first-order circuits; biquad circuits; Butterworth lowpass circuits; Butterworth bandpass circuits; the Chebyshev response; sensitivity; frequency transformations; highpass and band-elimination filters. This course meets for three (3) lecture hours per week. (Spring) (Internet)
ELET 4242. Control Systems. (3) Prerequisites: ELET 3113 and ETGR 3171. Automatic control systems concepts, system modeling, control system components, state space model, transfer function model, time responses, poles and zeros, closed loop, reduction of multiple subsystems, stability analysis, Routh-Hurwitz, performance analysis, design techniques, root locus, Bode, Nyquist, PID, and MATLAB control tool box. This course meets for three (3) lecture hours per week. (Spring) (Internet)
ELET 4293. Senior Project II. (2) (W, O) Prerequisites: ELET 4191 with a grade of C or better and a passing grade in ELET 4192. This is the second of a two semester sequence in senior design. Students will incorporate Applied Project Management techniques into the capstone project identified in ELET 4192 to finalize project analysis, development and implementation. This course meets for two (2) lecture hours per week. (Spring, Summer)
ENGL 1100. English as a Foreign Language. (3) Limited to students whose native language is not English who may need additional preparation before beginning the required first-year English composition courses. Does not count toward an English major or toward the General Education requirement. One may not register for ENGL 1100 before taking the English department's placement test for persons whose primary language is not English. (Fall, Spring)
ENGL 1101. English Composition. (3) Extensive practice in and discussion of composition in various forms, for different purposes, and for various audiences. Students experience writing as a means of personal growth, intellectual development, and communication. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
ENGL 1102. Writing in the Academic Community. (3) Prerequisite: ENGL 1101. Writing argumentation appropriate to inquiry in an intellectual community. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
ENGL 1103. Accelerated College Writing and Rhetoric. (3) Prerequisite: Placement by the English department. Accelerated writing curriculum that fulfills the requirement for ENGL 1101 and 1102. (Fall)
ENGL 2014. Topics in Writing. (1-3)  Offers instruction and practice in special types of writing, such as research or legal writing, that are not included in other writing courses. In addition, some sections may be designed for students who need strengthening of composition skills, or may offer instruction in various aspects of effective writing. ENGL 2014 may not be used toward the requirements for the English major. The maximum hours of credit allowed are six for ENGL 2014 or 2015, or for 2014 and 2015 together. (On demand)
ENGL 2015. Topics in Writing. (1-3)  Offers instruction and practice in special types of writing, such as writing for publication (exclusive of poetry, drama, and fiction), which are not included in other writing courses. In addition, some sections may offer instruction in various aspects of effective writing. Not more than three hours of 2015 may be used toward the requirements for the English major (and those three hours may not be used toward fulfillment of the 12 hours of English language or composition required for licensure in English). The maximum hours of credit allowed for any student are six for ENGL 2015 or 2014, or for 2015 and 2014 together. (On demand)
ENGL 2050. Topics in English. (3) Designed to offer topics of general interest not included in other courses. May be repeated for additional credit with the approval of the English department. Does not count toward the English major. (Yearly)
ENGL 2051. Topics in English – Writing Intensive. (3)  Designed to offer topics of general interest not included in other courses. May be repeated for additional credit with the approval of the English department. Does not count toward the English major. Fulfills General Education writing goal. (On demand)
ENGL 2052. Topics in English – Oral Communication. (3)  Designed to offer topics of general interest not included in other courses. May be repeated for additional credit with the approval of the English department. Does not count toward the English major. Fulfills General Education oral communication goal. (On demand)
ENGL 2053. Topics in English – Writing Intensive & Oral Communication. (3) (W, O) Designed to offer topics of general interest not included in other courses. May be repeated for additional credit with the approval of the English department. Does not count toward the English major. Fulfills General Education writing goal and oral communication goal. (On demand)
ENGL 2090. Topics in English. (3) Special topics not included in other courses. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. Does not fulfill General Education writing goal. (On demand)
ENGL 2091. Topics in English – Writing Intensive. (3)  Special topics not included in other courses. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. Fulfills General Education writing goal. (On demand)
ENGL 2092. Topics in English – Oral Communication. (3)  Designed to offer topics of general interest not included in other courses. May be repeated for additional credit with the approval of the English department. Fulfills General Education oral communication goal. (On demand)
ENGL 2093. Topics in English – Writing Intensive & Oral Communication. (3) (W, O) Designed to offer topics of general interest not included in other courses. May be repeated for additional credit with the approval of the English department. Fulfills General Education writing goal and oral communication goal. (On demand)
ENGL 2100. Writing About Literature. (3) Combined practice in writing and study of literature, emphasizing writing processes including revision. Must be completed before ENGL 3100 and other English coursework. Restricted to English majors and minors and Education majors. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ENGL 2101. Masterpieces of British Literature I. (3) An introduction to British Literature written before 1800. The course also provides backgrounds in the society and culture of the Middle Ages, the Renaissance, and the Age of Reason. (On demand)
ENGL 2102. Masterpieces of British Literature II. (3) An introduction to masterpieces of British Literature written since 1800. The course also provides backgrounds in the society and culture of the Romantic, Victorian, and Modern periods. (On demand)
ENGL 2103. Masterpieces of Modern Fiction. (3) Readings in selected novels and short stories written since 1850. (On demand)
ENGL 2104. Major American Writers. (3) Introductory readings in six to eight authors, approximately half from the 19th century and half from the 20th century, both poetry and prose. (On demand)
ENGL 2105. Introduction to Poetry. (3)  Representative poems and poets, drawn from several literary periods that introduce students to several poetic genres, to varied treatments of universal themes (such as love, death, disappointment, joy), and to various ideas about poetic imaginations. (Yearly)
ENGL 2106. Film Criticism. (3) Introduction to film as an art form. Emphasis will be on the critical analysis of the form and the content of films with attention to issues of visual narrative, audience, cinematography, editing, acting, etc. (On demand)
ENGL 2108. Introduction to Drama. (3)  Representative plays of the western world from the classical period to the modern period to introduce students to drama as literature, with consideration of staging, conventions of the theater, types of drama, and dramatic theory. (On demand)
ENGL 2114. Learning Community Seminar. (1) Educational forum for activities of the English Learning Community. Students will devise and complete assignments relating to their cultural and intellectual activities. Enrollment restricted to students accepted into the English Learning Community; may be repeated for up to three units of credit. Does not count toward the English major. Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. (Fall, Spring)
ENGL 2116. Introduction to Technical Communication. (3)  Technical Communication theory (such as organization, audience analysis, and editing) is taught in the context of oral and written formats, such as memoranda, proposals, reports, PowerPoint presentations, and includes formats and content common to students' own disciplines. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
ENGL 2126. Introduction to Creative Writing. (3)  This course introduces students to creative writing, including both poetry and fiction writing, assuming little or no previous creative writing experience. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ENGL 2127. Introduction to Poetry Writing. (3) An introductory course for those with little experience in reading, writing, and critiquing poetry. Students will read and discuss poetry in an anthology and also be responsible for writing poems based on assigned formal strategies or themes and for bringing them to a workshop setting for group critique. (On demand)
ENGL 2128. Introduction to Fiction Writing. (3) An introductory course for those with little experience in reading, writing, and critiquing fiction. Students will read and discuss short stories in an anthology and also be responsible for writing stories based on assigned formal strategies or themes and bringing them to a workshop setting for group critique. (On demand)
ENGL 2301. Introduction to African-American Literature. (3) Cross-listed as AFRS 2301. Prerequisites: ENGL 1101 and 1102 or 1103, or departmental permission. Survey of the major periods, texts, and issues in African-American literature. Prerequisite to 4000 level African- American literature courses in English department. (Fall, Spring)
ENGL 3050. Topics in English. (3) Special topics not included in other courses. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. Does not fulfill General Education writing goal. (On demand)
ENGL 3051. Topics in English – Writing Intensive. (3)  Special topics not included in other courses. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. Fulfills General Education writing goal. (On demand)
ENGL 3052. Topics in English – Oral Communication. (3)  Designed to offer topics of general interest not included in other courses. May be repeated for additional credit with the approval of the English department. Fulfills General Education oral communication goal. (On demand)
ENGL 3053. Topics in English – Writing Intensive & Oral Communication. (3) (W, O) Designed to offer topics of general interest not included in other courses. May be repeated for additional credit with the approval of the English department. Fulfills General Education writing goal and oral communication goal. (On demand)
ENGL 3100. Approaches to Literature. (3)  Introductory study and application of major critical approaches to literature, such as historical, psychological, mythological, and formalistic. Required of English major and minor. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ENGL 3102. Literature for Young Children. (3) Critical study of literature for children under the age of eight, covering such topics as picture books, nursery rhymes, and books for beginning readers. (Spring)
ENGL 3103. Children’s Literature. (3) Critical study of various genres of children’s literature, such as realistic fiction, fantasy, and picture books. (Fall, Spring)
ENGL 3104. Literature for Adolescents. (3) Critical study of literature intended for adolescent and preadolescent readers, as well as texts that deal with coming-of-age themes. (Fall, Spring)
ENGL 3132. Introduction to Contemporary American English. (3) Introduction to the study of word formation, the sound system, and the structure of contemporary American English, including characteristics and applications of traditional grammar. (Fall, Spring)
ENGL 3157. Twentieth Century Black American Literature: Prose. (3) Intensive study of selected black American 20th-century writers of fiction and nonfiction, beginning with the Harlem Renaissance. (Alternate years)
ENGL 3158. Gender and African-American Literature. (3) Cross-listed as AFRS 3158. Exploration of the intersection of gender and African-American literature, focusing on either Black women writers or Black male writers, or a combination in dialogue. (Alternate years)
ENGL 3159. African-American Poetry. (3) Crosslisted as AFRS 3159. Intensive study of African- American poetry, focusing on one period or traversing several. (Alternate years)
ENGL 3300. American Literature Survey. (3) This course surveys the whole of American literature from the Colonial to the Modern period. Major authors and literary movements, as well as important ideas and cultural issues will be addressed. Required of English majors. (Fall, Spring, Summer, Evenings)
ENGL 3301. British Literature Survey I. (3) This course surveys British literature from the Medieval period to the Renaissance. Major authors and literary movements as well as important ideas and cultural issues will be addressed. Required of English majors. (Fall, Spring, Summer, Evenings)
ENGL 3302. British Literature Survey II. (3) This course surveys British literature from the Neoclassical to the Modern period. Major authors and literary movements, as well as important ideas and cultural issues will be addressed. Required of English majors. (Fall, Spring, Summer, Evenings)
ENGL 3852. Independent Study. (1-3) Prerequisite: Permission of the department. Individual investigations and appropriate exposition of the results. (Unless special permission is granted by the department chair, no more than six hours of 3852 may apply toward the English major.) (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ENGL 4002. Women and Literature. (3) Selected topics focusing on women and literature, such as images of women, women as writers, and women as literary critics. With permission of the English department, may be repeated for credit as topics vary. (However, only six hours may be used for the requirements for the English major.) (On demand)
ENGL 4008. Topics in Advanced Technical Communication. (3) Prerequisites: ENGL 2116 and COMM 1101. Exploration, both theoretically and practically, of the interrelation of written, oral, graphic, and digital communication within technical rhetorical contexts. May be repeated once for additional credit with the approval of the English department. (On demand)
ENGL 4050. Topics in English. (3) Special topics not included in other courses. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. Does not fulfill General Education writing goal. (On demand)
ENGL 4051. Topics in English – Writing Intensive. (3)  Special topics not included in other courses. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. Fulfills General Education writing goal. (On demand)
ENGL 4052. Topics in English – Oral Communication. (3)  Designed to offer topics of general interest not included in other courses. May be repeated for additional credit with the approval of the English department. Fulfills General Education oral communication goal. (On demand)
ENGL 4053. Topics in English – Writing Intensive & Oral Communication. (3) (W, O) Designed to offer topics of general interest not included in other courses. May be repeated for additional credit with the approval of the English department. May be used as an elective toward the English major. Fulfills General Education writing goal and oral communication goal. (On demand)
ENGL 4090. Major Authors. (3) The works, ideas, and life of one to three significant authors. With permission of the English department, may be repeated once for credit as long as different authors are considered. (On demand)
ENGL 4102. Classics in British Children’s Literature. (3) Focuses on pivotal works in the history of British and British Colonial Children’s literature. (Fall)
ENGL 4103. Classics in American Children’s Literature. (3) Focuses on pivotal works in the history of American Children’s literature. (Fall)
ENGL 4104. Multiculturalism and Children’s Literature. (3) Focuses on works that represent one or more kinds of cultural, ethnic, or social diversity of the United States and other national literatures. (Fall)
ENGL 4111. Ancient World Literature. (3) Readings of ancient world literature, in English translation. (On demand)
ENGL 4112. Modern World Literature. (3) Readings in modern world literature, in English and in English translation. (On demand)
ENGL 4114. Milton. (3) A study of the major poems and selections from the minor works of Milton. (On demand)
ENGL 4118. British Renaissance Literature. (3) Readings of prose, poetry, and/or drama from the Renaissance period in England (16th and 17th centuries), which may include works by men and women writers such as Shakespeare, Milton, Donne, Lanyer, Wroth, and others. (On demand)
ENGL 4120. Romantic British Literature, 1785- 1832. (3) Literature from the Romantic period, with emphasis on the works of specific writers, which may include works by men and women writers such as Wordsworth, Blake, Coleridge, Wollstonecraft, Austen, and Smith. (On demand)
ENGL 4121. British Literature of the Restoration and 18th Century. (3) Representative poetry, prose, and/or drama from this period in British literary history, which may include works by men and women writers such as Pope, Dryden, Sheridan, Behn, Centlivre, and others. (On demand)
ENGL 4122. British Victorian Literature. (3) Readings in British literature during the Victorian period in England. Texts studied may include selections from poetry, prose, and/or drama and men and women writers such as Dickens, Browning, Tennyson, Bronte, Eliot, and Wilde. (On demand)
ENGL 4123. Modern British Literature. (3) Representative British literary texts (poetry, prose, and/or drama) that embody the cultural and literary developments of the 20th century. (On demand)
ENGL 4132. British Drama to 1642, Excluding Shakespeare. (3) A survey of late-medieval and Renaissance drama in England. (On demand)
ENGL 4139. Early American Literature. (3) Origins of American literature, from Colonial times to Washington Irving, including such authors as Edwards, Taylor, Franklin, Crevecoeur, Freneau, Brown. (On demand)
ENGL 4140. American Literature of the Romantic Period. (3) Important writers and ideas of the period of American romanticism, from Irving through Whitman, including such authors as Poe, Emerson, Thoreau, Hawthorne, Melville. (On demand)
ENGL 4141. American Literature of the Realist and Naturalist Periods. (3) Important writers and ideas of American literature, from Whitman through the period of World War I, including such authors as Dickinson, Twain, Howells, James, Crane, Dreiser, Frost. (On demand)
ENGL 4142. Modern American Literature. (3) Important writers and ideas of modern American literature, including such authors as Faulkner, Eliot, Hemingway, Cummings. (On demand)
ENGL 4145. Literature of the American South. (3) Selected works of Southern writers that reflect literary and cultural concerns from Colonial times to the present, including such authors as Poe, the early humorists, local color writers, Chopin, Faulkner, Warren, O'Connor, Welty. (Yearly)
ENGL 4150. Poetry. (3) Poetry written in English, focusing on a particular period, nationality, or topic. With permission of the English department, may be repeated once for credit as topics vary. (On demand)
ENGL 4151. Drama. (3) Drama written in English, focusing on a particular period, nationality, or topic. With permission of the English department, may be repeated once for credit as topics vary. (On demand)
ENGL 4153. Fiction. (3) Fiction written in English, focusing on a particular period, nationality, or topic. With permission of the English department, may be repeated once for credit as topics vary. (On demand)
ENGL 4155. Pan-African Literature. (3) Introduction to significant Pan-African literature, emphasizing the oral tradition, selected works of major authors in the Caribbean and Africa, and the relationships of these traditions to American, British and other literary traditions. Works not originally written in English will be studied in translation. (On demand)
ENGL 4161. Modern English Grammar. (3) A study of the structure of contemporary English, with an emphasis on descriptive approaches. (On demand)
ENGL 4165. Language and Culture. (3) Readings in and discussion and application of the interrelationships between language and culture, including basic introduction to contemporary American dialects and to social contexts of language. (Yearly)
ENGL 4167. The Mind and Language. (3) Introduction to the study of the mind from a linguistic perspective. Topics include language growth and loss, language deficits, modularity and hierarchical processing, the interaction of cognitive and linguistic faculties, parsing/processing strategies and limitations, and applications such as therapy, forensics, computing, teaching. (Alternate years)
ENGL 4180. Theories of Technical Communication. (3) Prerequisite: ENGL 2116. Rhetorical, psychological, and anthropological theories that underscore the interrelations of written, graphic, and digital communication within technical, rhetorical contexts. (Fall)
ENGL 4181. Writing and Designing User Documents. (3) Prerequisite: ENGL 2116. Researching and analyzing audiences to write publishable instructions. This includes the production, testing, and revision of tutorials, reference manuals, on-line documents, and digital media for users of computers and other technologies. (Spring)
ENGL 4182. Information Design and Digital Publishing. (3) Prerequisite: ENGL 2116. Theoretical and practical exploration of visual communication. By rhetorically integrating textand graphics, students will write and publish documents and online content for digital environments. (Fall)
ENGL 4183. Editing Technical Documents. (3) Prerequisite: ENGL 2116. Substantive editing, copyediting, project management, and editing in hardcopy documents and web and digital environments. (Spring)
ENGL 4202. Writing Poetry. (3) Prerequisite: ENGL 2126 or 2127, or permission of instructor. Further study of and practice in the writing of poetry within a workshop format. May be repeated once for credit with the permission of the English department. (Fall, Spring) (Evenings)
ENGL 4203. Writing Fiction. (3) Prerequisite: ENGL 2126 or 2128, or permission of instructor. This course provides further study of and practice in the writing of fiction within a workshop format. May be repeated once for credit with the permission of the English department. (Fall, Spring) (Evenings)
ENGL 4204. Expository Writing. (3)  Writing of essays, criticism, and various forms of exposition. (Fall, Spring) (Evenings)
ENGL 4208. Poetry Writing Workshop. (3) Prerequisite: ENGL 4202. Designed for advanced writers of poetry. Focuses primarily on student work and peer criticism of it. May be repeated once for credit with permission of department. (Yearly)
ENGL 4209. Fiction Writing Workshop. (3) Prerequisite: ENGL 4203. Designed for advanced writers of fiction. Focuses primarily on student work and peer criticism of it. May be repeated once for credit with permission of department. (Yearly)
ENGL 4211. Chaucer and Medieval Literature. (3) Readings that focus on the works of Chaucer, including The Canterbury Tales, and other works from the medieval period in England, which may include Troilus and Crisedye and various dramatic texts. (On demand)
ENGL 4254. Teaching English/Communication Skills to Middle and Secondary School Learners. (3) Prerequisite: Senior English major with a secondary education minor; senior middle grades major, or permission of the department. Approaches to the teaching of English, including recent theories and research related to writing and literary study, with special attention to technology. Designed primarily for teaching in grades 6-12. (Fall, Spring)
ENGL 4260. History of the English Language. (3) Origins and development of the English language, both spoken and written, from its earliest forms to contemporary usage. (Yearly)
ENGL 4263. Linguistics and Language Learning. (3) Readings in, discussions of, and application of linguistically oriented theories of language acquisition, directed toward gaining an understanding of language-learning processes and stages. (Alternate years)
ENGL 4290. Advanced Creative Project. (3) Prerequisite: ENGL 4208 or 4209, or permission of the instructor. The planning, writing, and polishing of a work of at least 20 pages of poetry or at least 40 pages of fiction or creative non-fiction by advanced undergraduate or graduate students with the guidance of a member of the department's creative writing faculty. The final work may be a single piece or a collection of pieces and will evolve under the supervision of the primary instructor. With permission of the department, students who took the course as undergraduates may repeat as graduate students. (On demand)
ENGL 4400. English Composition Practicum. (1-3)  Prerequisite: Permission of the instructor. Through supervised tutorial experience and seminars, this course introduces the student to current developments concerning composition and to a variety of methods for teaching English composition. This course is highly recommended for those planning to teach or those currently engaged in teaching. With permission of the English department may be repeated once for credit. (Fall)
ENGL 4410. Professional Internship. (3 or 6) Prerequisites: Permission of English Internship Coordinator. Restricted to juniors and seniors majoring or minoring in English or minoring in Technical/Professional Writing, who have at least a 2.5 GPA and have had a course in professional communication (e.g. journalism, technical communication, public relations, public relations lab, or mass media). Students work 8-10 hours (3 hours credit) or 16-20 hours (6 hours credit) per week in a placement arranged by the Internship Coordinator. May be repeated once for credit: only three credit hours may be applied to the English major; three additional hours may be counted as a University elective. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ENGL 4852. Independent Study. (1-3) Prerequisite: Permission of department. Individual investigations and appropriate exposition of the results. (Unless special permission is granted by the department chair, no more than six hours may apply toward the English major.) May be repeated for additional credit with approval of the English department. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ENGR 1201. Introduction to Engineering Practices and Principles I. (2) Corequisite: MATH 1241. An introduction to the different disciplines within engineering; the college’s computing system; academic, personal and professional development; teamwork; project planning; engineering design; engineering calculations; and oral and written communication skills within a multi-disciplinary format. ENGR 1202: Introduction to Engineering Practices and Principles II. (2) Prerequisite: ENGR 1201 with a grade of C or better. Additional prerequisite for mechanical engineering majors: MATH 1241 with a grade of C or better. Corequisite: ENGR 1201 with permission of department. Applications in the disciplines of Civil, Electrical, and Mechanical Engineering using tools and techniques specific to the major. Emphasis on analytical and problem solving skills and understanding of the profession/curriculum. Upper division engineering courses (3000 level and above) used to satisfy degree requirements within the College of Engineering are restricted to majors and minors of the College of Engineering. ENGR 3095. Leadership Academy Capstone. (0) Prerequisites: Admittance into the Leadership Academy program. Participants apply leadership, teamwork, ethical decision-making, communication, and strategic planning principles learned during prior semester Leadership Academy modules to a community-based service learning project. Implementation and evaluation of projects are approved by Leadership Academy staff and advisory board members. Graded on a Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory basis. ENGR 3295. Multidisciplinary Professional Development. (1) Prerequisite: Senior standing or Junior standing per departmental requirements. A series of multidisciplinary and disciplinary seminars and activities designed to introduce students to basic concepts of professionalism in engineering. Topics include global, societal, and contemporary issues of current interest such as – leadership, entrepreneurship, ethics, cultural diversity, and professional licensure. Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. ENGR 3590. Engineering Cooperative Education and 49ership Experience. (0) This course is required of Co-op and 49ership students during the semester they are working. Acceptance into the Experiential Learning Program by the University Career Center is required. Participating students pay a course registration fee for transcript notation (49ership and Co-op) and receive full-time student status (Co-op only). Assignments must be arranged and approved in advance. Course may be repeated; evaluation is Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory. Only open to undergraduate students; Graduate level students are encouraged to contact their academic departments to inquire about academic or industrial internship options for credit. For more information, contact the University Career Center. ENGR 3670. Total Quality Systems. (3) Prerequisite: Junior or Senior status and permission of instructor. An interdisciplinary approach to principles and practice in the applications of continuous quality improvement (CQI) and Total Quality Management (TQM). Classroom work on major applications, reengineering processes; process mapping, personal effectiveness and time management; technical presentations; CQI tools, statistical process control, designed experimentation; management and planning tools, engineering economy, and case studies; assignments and projects in team building, communication, and group problem solving. ENGR 4090. Special Topics. (1-4) Directed study of current topics of special interest. May be repeated for credit. (On demand)
ESCI 1101. Earth Sciences-Geography. (3) Basic geographical principles and processes in physical geography and the earth sciences: geographic locational methods, earth-sun relationships, earth radiation balance, atmospheric temperature and pressure, interpretation and simple forecasting of weather from mapped data, interpretation of soilmoisture and evapotranspiration balances, soil, climate systems, and biomes. (Fall, Spring)
ESCI 1101L. Earth Sciences-Geography Laboratory. (1) Prerequisite or corequisite: ESCI 1101. Experimental study and investigation of the basic principles and processes in physical geography and the earth sciences; geographic locational methods, earth-sun relationships, earth radiation balance, atmospheric temperature and pressure, interpretation and simple forecasting of weather from mapped data, interpretation of soil-moisture and evapotranspiration balances, soil, climate systems and biomes. One laboratory period of two hours per week. (Fall, Spring)
ESCI 2000. Topics in Earth Sciences. (1-4) Treatment of major topical issues in Earth Sciences. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (On demand)
ESCI 2010. National Parks: Science Behind the Scenery. (3) A discussion of the geological, environmental, and policy aspects of America’s national parks, which preserve some of the finest landscapes and scenic beauty in the world. Students will learn about the geological processes that created the landscapes in Yellowstone, Yosemite, and the Grand Canyon, as well as many other parks and monuments. The role the parks play as protectors of endangered species, habitats, and undeveloped lands will also be discussed. (Fall)
ESCI 2030. Near-Space Balloon Exploration. (2) Students in this class will design, build, and launch their own near-space capsule on a weather balloon, 15-20 miles into the stratosphere at the very edge of space. Students learn about the composition and conditions of the atmosphere and near-space environment, how to engineer a vehicle for that environment, take pictures and meteorological data during the flight, track the capsule with GPS, and recover the capsule on a parachute. (Spring)
ESCI 2101. The Environmental Dilemma. (3) Nature, causes, and responses to major environmental problems. (Yearly)
ESCI 2200. Introduction to Earth Sciences Research. (3) Prerequisites or corequisites: ESCI 1101; GEOL 1200 and 1200L. Basic techniques common to research in all of the earth sciences. Research design and organization, utilization of literature resources, and the use of quantitative methods. (On demand)
ESCI 2210. Field Methods in the Earth Sciences. (4) Prerequisites: ESCI 1101-1101L; GEOL 1200- 1200L; and ENGL 2116 or permission of instructor. Field techniques used in studies of geology, topography, and earth sciences. Skills related to the collection and presentation of scientific data emphasized. Three lecture hours, three hours of lab per week. Earth Sciences majors should take ESCI 2210 as soon as possible after completion of ESCI 1101-1101L and GEOL 1200-1200L. (Spring, Fall)
ESCI 3000. Selected Topics in Earth Sciences. (1-4) Prerequisite: ESCI 1101-1101L or GEOL 1200- 1200L and permission of instructor. In-depth treatment of specific topics selected from one of the fields of the earth sciences. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (On demand)
ESCI 3105. Oceanography. (3) Prerequisites: ESCI 1101 and GEOL 1200, or permission of instructor. Physical, chemical and geological aspects of the world’s oceans. Emphasis on oceanic exploration techniques, oceanic circulation, seawater chemistry, marine geology, and coastal systems. (On demand)
ESCI 3150. Natural Environments of North America. (3) Prerequisites: ESCI 1101 or GEOL 1200-1200L. Regional geomorphology and ecology of North America with emphasis on development, maintenance, and interaction of the geomorphic and ecological provinces. (On demand)
ESCI 3170. Environmental Quality Management. (3) Prerequisites: ESCI 1101-1101L. Selected methods of air and water resource analysis with emphasis on conceptual models and statistical techniques of environmental and risk assessment. (Fall)
ESCI 3180. Environmental Impact Analysis. (3) Prerequisites: ESCI and GEOL majors with junior or senior standing. Environmental impact requirements and associated procedures, guidelines, and methods of assessing physical environmental impacts. Three hours per week of combined lecture and supervised field work leading to the preparation of an environmental impact statement for a locally proposed action. (On demand)
ESCI 3500. Earth Sciences Cooperative Education and 49ership Experience. (0) Enrollment in this course is required for the department's earth sciences cooperative education and 49ership students during each semester that they are working. Acceptance into the Experiential Learning Program by the University Career Center is required. Participating students pay a course registration fee for transcript notation (49ership and co-op) and receive full-time student status (co-op only). Assignments must be arranged and approved in advance. Course may be repeated; evaluation is Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory. Only open to undergraduate students; Graduate level students are encouraged to contact their academic departments to inquire about academic or industrial internship options for credit. For more information, contact the University Career Center. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ESCI 3501. Earth Sciences Cooperative Education Seminar. (1) This course is required of earth sciences cooperative education students in each semester following a work assignment for presentation of earth sciences reports on the co-op learning experience. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ESCI 4000. Selected Topics in Earth Sciences. (1-4) Prerequisites: ESCI 1101-1101L, GEOL 1200- 1200L, or permission of the instructor. In-depth treatment of specific topics selected from one of the fields of the earth sciences. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (On demand)
ESCI 4005. Engineering Geology. (3) Prerequisites: GEOL 1200, 1200L, or permission of instructor. the application of geologic principles, techniques, and data to problems in the technology and use of earth materials. (On demand)
ESCI 4140. Hydrologic Processes. (4) Prerequisite: ESCI 1101-1101L or GEOL 1200-1200L. Atmospheric, soils, and geologic aspects of surface and ground water processes. Three lecture hours and one three-hour lab per week. (Fall)
ESCI 4155. Fluvial Processes. (4) Prerequisites: ESCI 1101-1101L or GEOL 1200-1200L. Hydrologic and geomorphic study of the transport of water and earth materials within stream systems. Erosion, mass wasting, open channel flow, sediment transport, flooding, stream channel morphology, morphometry of drainage basins, and related topics. Three lecture hours, three lab hours per week. (Spring)
ESCI 4160. Contaminant Transport. (3) Prerequisites: GEOL 1200, 1200L, ESCI 1101, 1101L, GEOL 4145, or permission of instructor. Development and application of equations describing mass and energy transport in the subsurface environment. Three hours lecture per week. (On demand)
ESCI 4170. Fundamentals of Remote Sensing. (4) Prerequisite: ESCI 1101-1101L or GEOL 1200- 1200L, or permission of instructor. Physical fundamentals of remote sensing and overview of airborne and satellite systems operating in the visible, infrared, and radar regions, and a review of applications for resource exploration, environmental studies, land use and land cover analysis, and natural hazards. Three lecture hours and one three-hour lab per week. (Fall)
ESCI 4180. Digital Image Processing in Remote Sensing. (4) Prerequisite: ESCI 4170 or permission of instructor. Scientific and computational foundations of digital image processing techniques for extracting earth resource information from remotely sensed data. Three lecture hours and three lab hours per week. (Spring)
ESCI 4210. Soil Science. (4) Prerequisites: GEOL 1200, 1200L, ESCI 1101, 1101L, GEOL 3115, GEOL 3124, or permission of instructor. Study of soils, soil-forming processes and soil morphology with an emphasis on soils as they relate to geologic landscapes and surficial processes. Students will learn how to describe and interpret soils in the field. Three hours lecture, three hours lab per week with occasional field trips. (Fall)
ESCI 4222. Watershed Science. (3) Prerequisites: Earth Science Majors and M.A. Geography students: ESCI 4140 or 4155 or GEOL 4145; Biology Majors and M.S. Biology students: BIOL 4149 and permission of the instructor; Civil Engineering Majors and M.S.C.E. students: CEGR 3141 or 5144 and permission of the instructor; all others require the permission of the instructor. Examinations of the cycling of water and chemical elements in natural and perturbed watersheds with emphasis on linkages between the hydrologic and biogeochemical processes which control runoff water quality. Topics include runoff processes, evapotranspiration, nutrient export and stream, riparian and hyporheic zone hydrochemical dynamics. (Spring, Alternate years)
ESCI 4233. Geoenvironmental Site Characterization. (4) Prerequisites: Earth Sciences, Geology, and M.A. Geography majors: ESCI 4140 or 4155. Others require permission of the instructor. Advanced fieldbased examination of hydrologic and geologic conditions in the southeastern United States within the context of current state and federal regulatory requirements and site characterization activities currently performed by professional environmental geoscientists. Topics include hydrologic investigation and water quality characterization, and geological and geophysical site investigations. (On demand)
ESCI 4400. Internship in Earth Sciences. (3-6) Prerequisite: Permission of the department. Research and/or work experience designed to be a logical extension of a student's academic program. The student must apply to the department for an internship by submitting a proposal which specifies the type of work/research experience preferred and how the internship will complement his or her academic program. The department will attempt to place the selected students in cooperating community organizations to complete specified research or work-related tasks which are based on a contractual arrangement between the student and community organization. The student can receive three to six hours credit, depending on the nature and extent of the internship assignment. (On demand)
ESCI 4600. Earth Sciences Seminar. (1)  Prerequisites: ESCI 1101, 1101L, GEOL 1200, 1200L and senior standing for Earth Sciences and Geology majors or permission of the instructor. Advanced seminar series examining major historical and modern research themes in the Earth Sciences. Course work consists of a series of independent and group oral presentations. The seminar meets weekly for two hours. Course may be repeated for credit as topic varies. (Fall, Spring)
ESCI 4800. Individual Study in Earth Sciences. (1-4) Prerequisite: Permission of the department and credit hours established in advance. Tutorial study or special research problems. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (On demand)
ETCE 1104. Civil/Construction CAD Applications. (2) Prerequisite: ETGR 1103 and civil engineering technology or construction management major standing or permission of the department. This course introduces students to civil and construction applications of AutoCAD Land Desktop and/or other similar civil engineering survey and design oriented CAD applications. One hour of lecture and three hours of laboratory per week. (Spring)
ETCE 1121. Construction Methods. (3) An introduction to the basic construction methods and operations used on civil engineering projects. Topics include basic construction and civil engineering terminology, identification and selection of construction equipment and techniques, and an overview of the components and processes used in the construction of concrete, steel, and wood-framed structures. (Fall)
ETCE 1211. Surveying I. (3) Prerequisite or corequisite: MATH 1103. Corequisite: ETCE 1211L. An introductory field surveying and site planning course covering standards, units, and calibration of equipment, measurement of distance, elevation, angles, and analysis of systematic and random errors in the measurement, adjustments of measurements, weighting, and principle of least squares. Two hours of lecture per week. (Spring)
ETCE 1211L. Surveying I Laboratory. (0) Prerequisite or corequisite: MATH 1103. Corequisite: ETCE 1211. Laboratory supporting ETCE 1211. Three hours of laboratory per week. Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. (Spring)
ETCE 1222. Construction Materials. (3) Corequisite: ETCE 1222L. Study of the behavior and physical properties of basic construction materials. Topics include mineral aggregates, Portland cement concrete, masonry, wood, asphalt concrete, metals, plastics, and other materials. Two hours of lecture per week. (Spring)
ETCE 1222L. Construction Materials Laboratory. (0) Corequisite: ETCE 1222. Laboratory supporting ETCE 1222. Three hours of laboratory per week. Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. (Spring)
ETCE 2112. Construction Surveying and Layout. (3) Prerequisites: CMET 1211 and ETGR 1103. Corequisite: ETCE 2112L. An intermediate surveying and site-planning course covering plane survey, design and layout of horizontal and vertical curves, direction and traversing, design of site plant, control of grading, and global positioning system. Two hours of lecture per week. (Fall)
ETCE 2112L. Constructions Surveying and Layout Laboratory. (0) Prerequisites: CMET 1211, ETGR 1103. Corequisite: ETCE 2112. Laboratory supporting ETCE 2112. Three hours of laboratory per week. Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. (Fall)
ETCE 2410. Introduction to Environmental Engineering Technology. (3) Prerequisites: MATH 1103 and ETGR 2101. This course is designed to serve as an introduction to environmental engineering technology. The course will provide an overview of the environmental field to include laws and regulations, water quality, hydraulic and hydrologic fundamentals, water and wastewater treatment, groundwater contamination, and solid waste management. (Spring)
ETCE 3123. Cost Estimating. (3) Prerequisites: ETCE 1222, AAS degree, or permission of the department. Methods used to determine material quantities, labor and equipment requirements, and costs associated with construction activities and projects. (Fall)
ETCE 3131. Foundations and Earthwork. (3) Prerequisite: ETGR 2102 or AAS degree. Study of basic design and construction of foundations. Background theories are generally introduced in concise forms as formulas or charts. Emphasis on practical aspects of foundation design and earthwork construction. (Fall)
ETCE 3131L. Soil Testing Laboratory. (1)  Prerequisite or Corequisite: ETCE 3131. Laboratory designed to familiarize the student with the common laboratory soil tests and analysis procedures with emphasis on the significance of the various tests, the testing procedures and the detailed computations. Three laboratory hours per week. (Fall)
ETCE 3163. Structural Analysis and Design I. (3) Prerequisite: ETGR 2102 or AAS degree. Basic concepts and principles of structural analysis and design. Emphasis on practical aspects of structural analysis and design to include beams, columns, trusses, frames, and temporary structures for construction projects. (Fall)
ETCE 3163L. Structures and Materials Laboratory. (1)  Prerequisite or Corequisite: ETCE 3163. Laboratory designed to evaluate structural materials commonly encountered in the civil and construction environments. Basic beam, truss and frame experiments will be conducted. Standard laboratory and field tests for typical materials such as block, brick, asphalt, concrete, steel and timber will be performed. Three laboratory hours per week. (Fall)
ETCE 3242. Hydraulics & Hydrology. (3) Prerequisites: ETGR 2102, ETCE 2410 or AAS degree. A study of the fundamental principles of hydraulics and their application in engineering practice, including the fundamentals of fluid flow through orifices, tubes and pipes, in open channels, and over weirs, pump design, network analysis, and modeling. (Spring)
ETCE 3242L. Hydraulics Laboratory. (1)  Prerequisite or Corequisite: ETCE 3242. Laboratory designed to provide the student with an understanding of the apparatus, techniques, and procedures used to measure hydraulic fluid properties and to verify the fundamentals of fluid flow through orifices, tubes and pipes, in open channels, and over weirs. Three laboratory hours per week. (Spring)
ETCE 3264. Structural Analysis II. (3) Prerequisites: ETCE 3163, MATH 1121. Deflection of structures. Analysis of statically determinate structures under fixed and moving loads, influence lines for moving loads. Analysis of statically indeterminate structures using the methods of three-moments, consistent distortions, slope deflection, moment-distribution and approximate analysis. An introduction to matrix methods of structural analysis. (Spring)
ETCE 3271. Building Systems. (3) Prerequisite: ETCE 2410. Basic theory and practical application of heating, ventilation, air conditioning, plumbing and electrical systems in construction. Study of National Fire and Plumbing Codes. (Spring)
ETCE 3271L. Building Systems Laboratory. (1)  Prerequisite or Corequisite: ETCE 3271. Laboratory exercises demonstrating the basic theory and practical application of heating, ventilation, air conditioning, plumbing and electrical systems in construction. Three laboratory hours per week. (Spring)
ETCE 4073. Special Topics – Civil Engineering Technology. (1-4) Prerequisite: senior standing and permission of instructor. A study of new and emerging technical topics pertinent to the field of civil engineering technology. May be repeated for credit. (On demand)
ETCE 4126. Project Scheduling and Control. (3) Prerequisites: ETCE 3123 and CMET 3224. Planning, scheduling, and monitoring construction projects, including development of critical path networks, Gannt bar charts, construction cost control, and reporting practices. (Fall)
ETCE 4126L. Construction Practices Laboratory. (1)  Prerequisite or Corequisite: ETCE 4126. A synthesis of prior work using fundamental scheduling and cost estimating principles as applied in a directed project. Three laboratory hours per week. (Fall)
ETCE 4143. Water and Wastewater Systems. (3) Prerequisite: ETCE 3242 and CHEM 1111 or CHEM 1251. Study of water supply, treatment, and distribution and liquidwaste disposal systems. (Spring)
ETCE 4143L. Environmental Laboratory. (1)  Prerequisite or Corequisite: ETCE 4143. Laboratory on the analysis of water and sewage and problems related to environmental control. Three laboratory hours per week. (On demand)
ETCE 4165. Structural Steel Design. (3) Prerequisite: ETCE 3163. Design of beams and columns, floor framing, tensions and compression members, bolted and welded connections according to AISC specifications. (Fall)
ETCE 4251. Highway Design and Construction. (3) Prerequisite: ETCE 2112 or AAS degree. Introduction to highway planning, economic considerations, and traffic engineering. Design and construction of modern highways including grade separations and interchanges. (Fall)
ETCE 4251L. Asphalt Mixtures Laboratory. (1)  Prerequisite or Corequisite: ETCE 4251. Study of physical properties of asphalt, of aggregates and their combinations, principles and practice in the design, construction and control of asphalt mixtures; laboratory tests for asphalts, aggregates, and mixture design, including specimen preparation and stability evaluation. Three laboratory hours per week. (On demand)
ETCE 4266. Reinforced Concrete Design. (3) Prerequisite: ETCE 3163. Design of rectangular beams, T-beams, columns, reinforced concrete floor systems, and reinforced concrete footings according to ACI code. Quality control of concrete and structural inspection. (Spring)
ETCE 4272. Capstone Project. (2)  Prerequisite: Senior standing in Civil Engineering Technology or permission of the department. Utilization of students’ previous course work to creatively investigate and produce solutions for a comprehensive civil engineering technology project. (Spring)
ETCE 4344. Applied Hydrology and Storm Water Management. (3) Prerequisite: ETCE 3242. Treatment of hydrologic principles, prediction of runoff, design of storm water systems and controls, and the application of best management practices. (On demand)
ETEE 1101. Electronics Lab I. (1) Prerequisite or corequisite: ELET 1111. Experiments that support the concepts and practices covered in ELET 1111. Three laboratory hours per week. ETEE 1201. Electronics Lab II. (1) Prerequisite or corequisite: ETEE 1223 and ETEE 1213. Experiments that support the concepts and practices covered in ETEE 1223 and ETEE 1213. Three laboratory hours per week. ETEE 1213. Digital Circuits I. (3) Prerequisite: ELET 1111. An introductory course in digital concepts, number systems, logic gates, Boolean algebra and combinational logic. Introduction to logic programming. Introduction to digital circuit technologies. ETEE 1223. AC Circuit Analysis. (3) Prerequisite: ELET 1111. Corequisite: MATH 1103. This course introduces AC electricity with an emphasis on circuit analysis, measurements, AC principles, circuit analysis laws and theorems, components and test equipment operation. ETEE 2101. Electronics Lab III. (1) Prerequisite or corequisite: ETEE 2113. Experiments that support the concepts and practices covered in ETEE2113 (Electronic Devices): Introduction to semiconductor based devices with an emphasis on analysis, selection, biasing and applications in power supplies, small signal amplifiers, and switching and control circuits. Three laboratory hours per week. ETEE 2113. Electronic Devices. (3) Prerequisite: ETEE 1223 and MATH1103. This course is an introduction to semiconductor-based devices such as diodes, bipolar transistors, FETs, thermistors, and related components. Emphasis is placed on analysis, selection, biasing, and applications in power supplies, small signal amplifiers, and switching and control circuits. ETEE 2122. Electronic Drafting and Design. (2) Prerequisite: ETEE 1223. Corequisite: ETEE 2113. This course introduces computer-aided drafting (CAD) with an emphasis on application in the electronics field. Topics include electronics industry standards (symbols, schematic diagrams, layouts); drawing electronic circuit diagrams; electronic drafting practices and components such as resistors, capacitors, and ICs. Topics include editing, screen capturing, and cutting/pasting into reports. ETEE 2133. Digital Circuits II. (3) Prerequisite: ETEE 1213. Design and application of sequential circuits including flip-flops, counters, registers, and their interactions as state machines. Introduction to the architecture of microprocessors. Introduction to digital signal processing. ETEE 2143. Introduction to Electrical Power Systems. (3) Prerequisite: ETEE 1223. This course covers the basic principles of electric power systems, including transmission lines, generator and transformer characteristics, and fault detection and correction. Emphasis is placed on circuit performance analysis in regards to voltage regulation, power factor, and protection devices. ETEE 2201. Electronics Lab IV. (1) Prerequisite or corequisite: ETEE 2213. Experiments that support the concepts and practices covered in ETEE2213 (Introduction to Microprocessors): Introduction to microprocessor architecture and microcomputer systems including memory and input/output interfacing, assembly language programming, bus architecture, bus cycle types, I/O systems, memory systems, and interrupts. ETEE 2213. Introduction to Microprocessors. (3) Prerequisite: ETEE 1213. This course introduces microprocessor architecture and microcomputer systems including memory and input/output interfacing, assembly language programming, bus architecture, bus cycle types, I/O systems, memory systems, and interrupts. ETEE 2233. Introduction to Computer Networks. (3) Prerequisite: ETEE 1213. The fundamentals of local area networks and their operation in business and computer environments is covered, including the characteristics of network topologies, system hardware (repeaters, bridges, routers, gateways), system configuration, and installation and administration of the LAN. ETEE 2243. Introduction to Control Systems. (3) Prerequisites: ETEE 1213 and ETEE 1223. The fundamental concepts of control, systems, sensors, actuator, and associated peripheral devices are covered, including rotating machine theory, ladder logic, electromechanical and solid state relays, motor controls, pilot devices, and PLC (programmable logic controllers), programming and networking. Upper division engineering courses (3000 level and above) used to satisfy degree requirements within the College of Engineering are restricted to majors and minors of the College of Engineering. ETEE 3124. Analysis of Linear Networks II. (4) Prerequisite: ETEE 3133 with a grade of C or better. Corequisite: ETGR 3171. Circuit analysis utilizing network theorems and techniques in the frequency domain. 2nd order responses. Two port network analysis and transfer functions. Bode plots; transformers and filter applications; introduction to Fourier analysis. Application of simulation software for circuit analysis. ETEE 3133. Analysis of Linear Networks I. (3) Prerequisite: ETEE 1223 or AAS degree. Corequisites: MATH 1121 or ETGR 3171 and junior standing in ET department. Resistive circuits; current and voltage sources; Kirchoff’s laws, network theorems, RC and RL circuits; waveform analysis and synthesis; time domain circuit analysis; 1st order natural and forced responses; Laplace Transform fundamentals. Circuit transformations. Intro to frequency domain circuit analysis. Application of simulation software for circuit analysis. ETEE 3153. ELET Laboratory V. (1)  Corequisites: ETEE 3133 and ETEE 3183. Experiments which support concepts and practice covered in ETEE 3133 and ETEE 3183. Three laboratory hours per week. ETEE 3156. ELET Laboratory VI. (1)  Corequisite: ETEE 3124. Experiments with support concepts and practice covered in ETEE 3124. Three laboratory hours per week. ETEE 3183. Digital Logic Design. (3) Prerequisite: ETEE 1213 or AAS degree and junior standing in ET department. Design of combinational and sequential digital logic circuits. Minimization methods and state assignment techniques. Circuit implementation using MSI, LSI, and programmable circuits. Introduction to computer architecture. ETEE 3211. Active Networks I. (3) Prerequisite: ETEE 3124 with a grade of C or better and ETGR 3171. Rectifiers; amplifiers analysis; transistor biasing; small signal models; feedback amplifier analysis; amplifier frequency response. ETEE 3212. Active Networks II. (3) Prerequisite: ETEE 3211 with a grade of C or better. Amplifier frequency response (continued); feedback amplifier frequency response; operational amplifiers and applications. ETEE 3213. Industrial Electronics. (3) Prerequisite: ETEE 3124. Prerequisite or corequisite: ETEE 3211. Powerdiodes, bipolar power transistors, thyristors, power MOSFET's and their circuit applications to industrial problems. ETEE 3214. Operational Amplifiers with Applications. (3) Prerequisite: ETEE 3211. Idea OP-AMP analysis, practical OP-AMP considerations, linear OP-AMP circuits, nonlinear OP-AMP circuits, practical applications. ETEE 3222. Automatic Controls. (3) Prerequisite or corequisite: ETEE 3212. Automatic control concepts; mathematical models; control system components; transient and frequency response; control system design. ETEE 3230. Electronic Communications. (3) Prerequisites or corequisites: Senior status in ET or permission of department. This course covers basic principles and concepts of modern communication systems. Topics include systems, signals, modulations, transmission, reception and networks. (On demand)
ETEE 3240. Fiber Optics Systems. (3) Prerequisites or corequisites: Senior status in ET or permission of department. Introduction to optical fiber communications systems. Review of ray and wave optics. Fundamentals of amplitude, frequency, and digital modulation/demodulation. Optic fiber waveguides. Light sources and detectors. Components, systems, and networks. (On demand)
ETEE 3255. ELET Laboratory VII (Computer Emphasis). (1)  Corequisite: ETEE 3211. Experiments which support concepts and practice covered in ETEE 3211. Three laboratory hours per week. ETEE 3257. ELET Laboratory VII (Electronics Emphasis). (1)  Corequisite: ETEE 3211. Experiments which support concepts and practice covered in ETEE 3211. Three laboratory hours per week. ETEE 3260. Opto-Electronic Communications Laboratory. (1)  Corequisite: ETEE 3230, ETEE 3240, senior status in ET or permission of department. Opto-electronic Communications system measurements, instrumentation, and applications. Experiments support concepts and practice covered in ETEE 3230 and 3240. (On demand). ETEE 3261. Industrial Instrumentation. (3) Prerequisites: ETEE 3124. Pneumatic and electrical sensors and transducers used for measuring physical processes, such as temperature, pressure, and flow rate; selection criteria; standards and calibration. (On demand)
ETEE 3275. Integrated Circuit Applications. (3) Prerequisites: ETEE 3183. Study of the external characteristics of digital and analog integrated circuits. Applications of these circuits in digital systems. Design constraints and considerations due to device limitations. Device selection based upon application requirements. ETEE 3281. Computer Design. (3) Prerequisite: ETEE 1213 or AAS degree and junior standing in ET department. Corequisite: ETEE 3183. Organization and design approaches for computer network systems. LAN design, hardware and software considerations, network operating systems, TCP/IP fundamentals. ETEE 3284. Design of Real-Time Systems. (3) Prerequisite: ETEE 3285. Prerequisite or corequisite: ETEE 3281. Characteristics and applications of real-time computer systems, especially as applied to process control, monitoring, and data collection; the computer as a part of the total system, programming for real-time applications; reliability and maintainability; effects of downtime. (On demand)
ETEE 3285. Assembly-Language Programming. (3) Prerequisite: ETEE 1213 or AAS degree and junior standing in ET department. Corequisite: ETEE 3183. Programming methodology and assembly language programming for the MC6800 series microprocessors. ETEE 3286. Microcomputer Applications. (3) Prerequisite: ETGR 2122 or AAS degree and junior standing in ET department. Applied programming of microcomputers for engineering applications using Java. Object-oriented program design methods, Graphical user interfaces for data input and output, computer graphics, and computer animation. ETEE 3641. Senior Design Project. (1) (W, O) Prerequisite: Senior standing in Electrical Engineering Technology or permission of the department. A senior design project with a topic agreed to by student and instructor. Course builds upon technology course work and professional topics seminar. Topics include project planning design, construction, test documentation, and oral presentation of results. FIRE SAFETY ENGINEERING TECHNOLOGY (ETFS) ETFS 1120. Fundamentals of Fire Protection. (3) This course is an introduction to the relevant issues one would encounter upon entering a career in fire protection. The course is an overview of many areas including fire protection career opportunities, history of public fire protection, general chemistry and physics of fire, codes and ordinances and fire protection systems and equipment. ETFS 1232. Fire Protection Hydraulics and Water Supply. (3) Provides a foundation of theoretical knowledge in order to understand the principles of the use of water in fire protection and to apply hydraulic principles to analyze and to solve water supply problems. ETFS 1252. Fire Protection Law. (3) Provides information about potential legal liabilities encountered every day by fire, safety and emergency personnel. Explains how to research, read and understand various statutes, regulations & cases. Actual cases are presented in detail and followed by explanations that identify the most important issues facing emergency & safety personnel. ETFS 2124. Fundamentals of Fire Prevention. (3) This class provides a fundamental overview of the history and philosophy regarding fire prevention. Class will investigate the organizational and operational aspects of a fire prevention bureau including the use of fire codes, identification and correction of fire hazards, and the relationships of fire prevention with built-in fire protections systems, fire investigation, and the positive effects of fire and life-safety education. ETFS 2126. Fire Investigation. (3) This course covers investigation into various types of fires: structure, wildland, automobile, fabric, and chemical. Topics include fire chemistry and physics, scene analysis, case analysis, arson, the new generation of petroleum products, post-flashover patterns of damage, misuse of post-fire indicators, and documentation. ETFS 2132. Building Construction for Fire Protection. (3) Studies the components of building construction that relate to fire and life safety. The focus of this course is on fire fighter safety. The elements of construction and design of structures are shown to be key factors when inspecting buildings, preplanning fire operations, and operating at emergencies. ETFS 2144. Fire Protection Systems. (3) Provides information relating to the features of design and operation of fire detection and alarm systems, heat and smoke control systems, special protection and sprinkler systems, water supply for fire protection and portable fire extinguishers. ETFS 2230. Hazardous Materials. (3) This course focuses on the basic knowledge required to evaluate the potential hazards and behavior of materials considered hazardous. The course examines the reasons for chemical behavior of hazardous materials and is designed to improve decision making abilities when hazardous materials are encountered in the workplace or at an emergency scene. ETFS 2264. Fire Behavior and Combustion. (3) Explores the theories and fundamentals of how and why fires start, spread, and are controlled. ETFS 2264L. Fire Behavior and Combustion Laboratory. (1) Laboratory experiments and hands-on computer simulations to illustrate the concepts presented in ETFS 2264. Upper division engineering courses (3000 level and above) used to satisfy degree requirements within the College of Engineering are restricted to majors and minors of the College of Engineering. ETFS 3103. Principles of Fire Behavior. (3) Fundamental principles of fire chemistry and physics, and mechanisms that control enclosure fires. Topics include basic principles of fluid mechanics, thermodynamics, heat transfer, and combustion as far as those subjects relate to fire dynamics; ignition of liquids and solids; flame spread over liquid and solid surfaces and through porous fuel beds; burning rate; diffusion flames and plumes; combustion products; and compartment fires. ETFS 3113. Building Fire Safety. (3) Construction standards and codes to ensure acceptable levels of fire safety in buildings. Topics include anatomy of building construction, building construction features affecting fire performance, fundamentals of reading plans and specifications, the traditional code approach to passive fire protection, trade-offs between active and passive fire protection, concepts of rational fire design for structural members, and performancebased fire design as an alternative to traditionally prescriptive codes. ETFS 3123. Industrial Hazards & Electricity. (3) Typical industrial hazards encountered including: compressed gasses, chemicals, bio-toxins, radiation sources, boilers and ovens. Introductory concepts and methods of analysis of AC & DC circuits, electrical switchgear, and rotating machinery. Compliance & reporting issues in an industrial setting. Safety procedures and safety equipment will also be discussed in regards to working as a fire safety engineer. ETFS 3124. Risk Management for the Emergency Services. (3) An exploration of management and organizational principles with emphasis on controlling the risk associated with operations in the emergency services. In depth discussion of recognizing and controlling risk, personnel accountability, incident management systems and post-incident analysis as related to the emergency services. Critical analysis of private protection measures available to reduce loss potential. ETFS 3144. Active Fire Protection. (3) Review of fire suppression, alarm, and smoke control systems. Topics include fixed and portable suppression systems, fire suppression agents and extinguishing mechanisms, fire detection devices, fire protective detection and signaling systems, smoke production in fires and principles of smoke movement and management. ETFS 3183. Fire Safety Engineering Problem Analysis. (3) Prerequisite: ETFS 3103. Methods of solving fire safety engineering problems. Topics include enclosure fire radiation heat transfer calculations; calculations of vent flows in enclosure fires; estimating ignition, flame spread, and heat release rate properties of materials on the basis of experimental data; smoke filling of enclosures; and conduction heat transfer through fire protective materials. ETFS 3233. Applied Fire Engineering Design and Analysis. (3) Prerequisite: ETFS 3103. Application of fire safety engineering technology in fire design and analysis of fires. Topics include computer modeling of compartment fires and emergency evacuation of buildings, structural fire design, sprinkler system design, performance-based design, and fire investigation and reconstruction. ETFS 3400. Practicum. (1-4) Prerequisite: Must be classified as a junior, have a cumulative 2.2 GPA and the approval of FSET program faculty. This course is designed to allow students to participate in an approved applied practicum designed to allow theoretical and course-based learning in a supervised fire and/or safety related environment. Each practicum experience is individual and is arranged with a contract between the supervising faculty member, the student and the employer. Students must complete the practicum proposal form and identify a faculty member who will direct and evaluate the completed work. Practicum requires a weekly progress report as well as a final report and presentation to be graded by the supervising faculty member. May be repeated for up to a total of 4 hours. (On demand)
ETFS 3611. Professional Leadership Seminar. (1) (W, O) This course is to provide a framework of executive-level competencies by focusing primarily on areas and issues of personal effectiveness. The issue of command perspective vs. a first line fire fighter perspective are examined. The course includes case study analysis, role-playing and experiential activities. Students will develop desirable goals in the areas of their professional, personal community, and family life. Course topics include leadership, multiple roles, decision skills, influencing leaders, coaching and mentoring, and effective use of personal computing. ETFS 3800. Independent Study. (1-3) Prerequisite: Must be classified as a junior, have a cumulative 2.2 GPA and the approval of FSET program faculty. This course is designed to allow students to take responsibility for the direction of their learning about a topic of interest to them. Each independent study is individual and is arranged with a contract between the supervising faculty member and the student. Students must complete the independent study proposal form and identify a faculty member who will direct and evaluate the completed work. Each hour of credit for this course should be comparable to what would be expected in the classroom – 15 hours contact time plus outside work or approximately 30 hours. The project is culminated with a final report and presentation. May be repeated for a total of 3 hours. (On demand)
ETFS 4123. Command and Control of Major Disasters. (3) This course focuses on the commanding officer's responsibility while conducting major operations involving multi-alarm units and man-made disasters that may require interagency or jurisdictional coordination. Earthquakes, hurricanes, terrorism, hazardous materials releases, tornadoes, and floods are some of the topics covered. Emphasis is placed on rapid fireground decision making, advanced incident command, command and control, safety, personnel accountability, hazard preparedness, mitigation, response, recovery, evacuation, sheltering and communications. ETFS 4243. Research Investigation. (3) (W, O) Application of practical, up-to-date review of fire research and its application. The transfer of research and its implications for fire prevention and protection programs are addressed. Development of a student project and a written report in a specified area in fire administration or fire science technology with faculty supervision. Analytical modeling, technical research, oral and written reporting of progress and findings are required. ETFS 4323. Advanced Fire Service Administration. (3) A study of management theories, leadership philosophies and strategies for the fire service. Emphasis in the course will be on planning, organizing staffing, and evaluating fire protection services. Public fire education, loss prevention principles, and management of resources particular to fire and emergency services are addressed. Discussion of techniques for assessment of public fire protection and its impact on the community and environment. ENGINEERING TECHNOLOGY (ETGR) ETGR 1100. Engineering Technology Computer Applications. (3) This course introduces the use of computer applications required for engineering technologists. Topics include using the computer to solve technical problems, an introduction to engineering computer applications, and the use of standard office applications in engineering applications. Also covered are topics introducing the use of scientific calculators and various engineering applications software. ETGR 1103. Technical Drawing I. (2) This course deals with the fundamentals of technical drawing. Topics include drawing layouts, sketching, orthographic projections, views, lines, dimensioning techniques, and introduction to Computer Aided Drawing (CAD). Upon completion of the course, students should be able to understand, interpret, and produce basic technical drawings, as well as be familiar with the most common commands of modern computer aided drawing tools such as AutoCAD. One hour of Lecture and three hours of laboratory per week. ETGR 1104. Technical Drawing II. (2) Prerequisite: ETGR 1103. This course is a continuation of ETGR 1103, and introduces the student to advanced techniques of Computer Aided Drawing (CAD). Topics include three-dimensional wireframe, surface, and solid models, as well as rendering and generation of two-dimensional technical drawings from three-dimensional models. Upon completion of the course, students should be able to create, modify, and render three-dimensional models using modern computer aided drawing tools such as AutoCAD. One hour of lecture and three hours of laboratory per week. (Spring)
ETGR 1201. Introduction to Engineering Technology. (2) An introduction to the different disciplines within engineering technology; the college’s computing system; academic, personal, and professional development; teamwork; project planning; engineering design; engineering calculations; and oral and written communication skills within a multi-disciplinary format. ETGR 2101. Applied Mechanics I. (3) Prerequisite: Math 1103. This course covers fundamentals and applications of statics. Topics of study include the analysis of coplanar and noncoplanar force systems using analytical and graphical methods. Included are systems of forces and couples, equilibrium of particles and rigid bodies, distributed force systems, centroids and moments of inertia, and introduction to the analysis of structures. ETGR 2102. Applied Mechanics II. (3) Prerequisite: ETGR 2101 Applied Mechanics I. This course covers the fundamentals of the mechanics of deformable bodies and introduces the student to the field of dynamics. Topics include concepts of stress and strain, axial load, statically indeterminate axially loaded members, the principle of superposition, torsion, bending and shear stresses in beams, deflection of beams, the elastic curve, transformation of stress and strain, Mohr's circle, introduction to stability and buckling of columns, and an introduction to dynamics. ETGR 2106. AC & DC Circuits. (3) Prerequisites: PHYS 1102, MATH 1100. This course provides an introduction to AC and DC circuits. Simple series and series-parallel circuits will be used to illustrate applications of Ohm’s Law and Kirchhoff’s Laws. Power in DC resistive circuits will be discussed. Sine waves, complex numbers and phasors will be introduced to show their applications to analysis of AC circuits. Capacitors and inductors and their effects will be covered. ETGR 2122. Technical Programming. (3) This course introduces computer programming using a high level programming language as related to engineering technology. Topics include input/output operations, sequence, selection, iteration, arithmetic operations, arrays tables, and pointers. Upper division engineering courses (3000 level and above) used to satisfy degree requirements within the College of Engineering are restricted to majors and minors of the College of Engineering. ETGR 3000. Special Topics in Engineering Technology. (1-4) Prerequisite: senior standing in Engineering Technology or permission of the department. Examination of specific new areas which are emerging in the various fields of engineering technology. The course builds upon the knowledge the students have gained from their engineering technology curriculum. May be repeated for credit. (On demand)
ETGR 3071. Engineering Technology Professional Seminar. (1)  Provides an introduction to the department of Engineering Technology, the William States Lee College of Engineering, and UNC Charlotte. Addresses professional issues such as ethics, corporate culture, and team work. Relies heavily on computer usage outside of class. ETGR 3171. Engineering Analysis I. (3) Prerequisite: MATH 1121. Methods of solving engineering problems which involve the differentiation and integration of algebraic, trigonometric and logarithmic functions; use of integral tables. ETGR 3222. Engineering Economics. (3) Principles of evaluating alternative engineering proposals. Compound interest formulas and applications, present worth, equivalent uniform annual value, rate of return, depreciation and depletion, economic feasibility of projects. ETGR 3223. Geometric Dimensioning & Tolerancing and Metrology. (3) Prerequisite: Knowledge of engineering graphics and machine shop practices. Study of the latest standard and methods available for the application of GD&T in interpretation and design of engineering drawings to assure form, fit and function while maintaining manufacturing efficiency. Study of and laboratory experiences with precision dimensional measuring instrumentation and machines. Two hours of lecture and three hours of laboratory per week. (On demand)
ETGR 3233. Parametric Solid Modeling. (3) Prerequisite: ETGR 1104. Study of parametric solid modeling as a design/drawing tool using software such as Pro|Engineer. Topics include creation of threedimensional solid models, assemblies, and renderings, as well as generation of two-dimensional technical drawings from three-dimensional models. (On demand)
ETGR 3272. Applied Numerical Methods. (3) Prerequisites: ETGR 2122 and ETGR 3171. This course is designed to familiarize students with numerical methods for the solution of engineering problems using modern digital computer methods. This course will emphasize applying these techniques to both Mechanical and Civil Engineering Technology problems. This course will expose the student to problem solution techniques using commercially available tools, along with developing the student’s ability to construct specialty algorithms within the framework of these tools. (Fall, Summer)
ETGR 3643. Senior Design Project. (3) (W, O) Prerequisite: Senior Standing and permission of academic advisor. A capstone course in which individual students or teams propose and design a device, system, or process using senior level tools and abilities in their chosen disciplines; teamwork skills; instruction and writing practice in problem definition, design objectives, writing proposals and progress reports, creative problem solving, project planning, design evaluation, final formal technical reports and oral presentations. ETGR 3695. Engineering Technology Practicum Seminar. (1) Prerequisite: ETMF 3490 or ENGR 3590. Required during the semester immediately following each work assignment for students enrolled in either ETMF 3490 or ENGR 3590; for presentation of engineering reports (verbal and oral) on work done the prior semester. May be repeated for credit. ETGR 4100. Engineering Technology Interdisciplinary Industrial Senior Design Project I. (2) (O, W) Prerequisites for MET students: ETME 3143 and ETME 3213. Co-requisite or prerequisite for MET students: ETME 3164 or permission. Prerequisites for ELET students: Senior standing in department. Co-requisite for ELET students: ELET 4191. Prerequisites for CIET students: ETCE 4251. This is the first of a two semester sequence in senior design that utilizes industrial and university sponsored projects to expose engineering technology students in their final year of training to real world project execution and management, in addition to demonstrating abilities as developed by the coursework taken thus far. These projects are usually interdisciplinary in nature, involving students in groups that contain more than one engineering discipline. Projects are defined for the students by statements of work issued by the funding entities. In the first semester, students are exposed to proper project management and planning methodology, along with project documentation. This course meets for one (1) lecture hours and three (3) laboratory hours per week. (Fall)
ETGR 4200. Engineering Technology Interdisciplinary Industrial Senior Design Project II. (2) (O, W) Prerequisite: ETGR 4100 with a grade of C or better. Prerequisite for ELET students: ELET 4191 with a grade of C or better. This is the second of a two semester sequence in senior design that utilizes industrial and university sponsored projects. Students will incorporate Applied Project Management techniques into the capstone project identified in ETGR 4100, in addition to executing the design plans generated in ETGR 4100. This course meets for one (1) lecture hours and three (3) laboratory hours per week. (Spring)
ETIN 3103. Methods Analysis. (3) Analysis of work methods; a study of work measurement systems; regression techniques in formula construction; progress curves. (On demand)
ETIN 3123. Production Control Systems. (3) Prerequisite: statistics. Principles, analysis and design of production and inventory planning and control systems. Demand forecasting, production scheduling and control systems and introduction to CPM. (On demand)
ETIN 3133. Quality Control. (3) Principles and applications of quantitative methods of quality control to design and production processes. Introduction to design of experiments, process control charts, Pareto charts, and other quality analysis tools for both service and manufacturing industries. (On demand)
ETIN 3203. Plant Layout. (3) Prerequisite: ETIN 3103. Designing a plant or office with respect to material handling, machine location, auxiliary services, capital requirements, safety and personnel organization. (On demand)
ETIN 3233. Occupational Safety. (3) Causes and prevention of industrial accidents. Hazardous processes and material. Design of accident prevention programs. (On demand)
ETIN 3243. Occupational Health Technology. (3) Methodology and philosophy of evaluating and monitoring the work environment for human stresses and toxic substances which affect the health of the worker. Topics include gases, vapors, fumes and dust; radio-activity hazards; occupational diseases; thermal stress; illumination and exhaust ventilation. (On demand)
ETIN 3263. Human Factors. (3) Human capabilities and limitations affecting communications and response in man-machine systems. Physiological and psychological fundamentals; anthropometrics. (On demand)
ETME 1101. Manufacturing Processes. (3) This course surveys and introduces common manufacturing processes and design for manufacture considerations. Student will be introduced to methods and equipment used to transform materials, and to the interdependency between geometry (form), materials properties, and processes and their effects on functionality of the manufactured artifact. Coverage will include processing of polymers, metals, and ceramics. The purpose of this course is to provide the students the conceptual understanding of materials processes. ETME 2101. Applied Materials. (3) Prerequisite: MATH 1103. This course introduces the student to materials and to the concept that materials are designed to provide the desired properties in the same way that the parts themselves are designed. The students will learn to understand that the processes we use to change materials into the geometries we want for also change the properties of the materials. The course intends to approach materials from a design and manufacturing perspective. ETME 2102. Mechanisms. (3) Prerequisites: ETGR 1103, PHYS 1101. This course covers plane motion and devices used to generate plane motion. Topics include analysis of displacement, velocity, acceleration, gears, cams and other mechanical systems. (Spring)
ETME 2156. Machine Shop Practices. (2) Prerequisite: ETGR 1103. This course introduces students to machine shop techniques and designing for machining with a combination of lectures and projects. Students will learn design for machining guidelines, about specification of machining operations, and about shop measurement instruments and techniques. (Spring)
ETME 2156L Machine Shop Practices Lab. (1) See ETME 2156. (Spring)
ETME 2202. Introduction to Mechanical Design. (2) Prerequisites: ETGR 1104, ETGR 1201. This course introduces mechanical design techniques using computer based parametric modeling tools such as Autodesk Inventor. Topics include feature based solid modeling, design constraints, assemblies, mechanisms, animations, and design documentation via technical drawings. Proficiency is demonstrated by an end-of-term design project. (Fall)
ETME 3113. Dynamics. (3) Prerequisites: MATH 1121, ETGR 2101, and ETME 2102. The dynamic behavior of particles; translation, rotation and plane motion of a rigid body, the principles of conservation of energy and momentum. ETME 3123. Strength of Materials. (3) Prerequisites: ETGR 2101 with a C or better. Corequisite: MATH 1121. Stress-strain relationships resulting from direct loads, torsional loads and bending loads, and the results obtained from applying more than one of these loads simultaneously. Beam deflection and column loading. ETME 3133. Fluid Mechanics. (3) Prerequisite: ETGR 2101. Fundamental principles of fluid mechanics. Topics include manometry, buoyancy, forces on submerged bodies, boundary layers, flow over surfaces, Bernoulli's equation with applications, orifices, pipe losses and an introduction to hydrodynamics. ETME 3143. Thermodynamics. (3) Prerequisites: MATH 1121. Fundamentals of thermodynamics including work and heat; classical approach to first and second laws of thermodynamics; ideal gas, entropy, reversibility, irreversibility, and study of various processes and cycles. ETME 3151. Fluid Mechanics Laboratory. (1)  Prerequisite or corequisite: ETME 3133. Flow through conduits and in open channels, the experimental determination of fluid specific weights, viscosity and flash and fire points. Flow measuring devices such as orifices, venturi tubes, anemometers and pitot tubes. Laminar-turbulent flow and stability. ETME 3152. Stress Analysis Laboratory. (1)  Prerequisite or corequisite: ETME 3123. Experiments illustrating stress-strain relationships in engineering materials and the use of brittle coating, photoelasticity and electrical-resistance strain gages. ETME 3163. Instrumentation and Controls. (3) Prerequisite: ETGR 2106. Introduction to instrumentation for measurement and control of physical variables, with emphasis on electronic systems. Review of basic circuit analysis, electrical instruments, sensors and measurement principles and a survey of automatic controls from a systems point of view. ETME 3213. Machine Design I. (3) Prerequisite: ETME 2101, ETME 3123. Analysis and design of clutches, brakes, belts and roller chain. Indeterminate normal loading, superposition of stresses and deflections, compound stresses, columns and fatigue. Theories of failure. Shaft design, deflections of shafts with nonuniform moments of inertia involving computer verification. Antifriction bearings, engineering materials, helical compression springs. Small mechanical component and system designs. ETME 3223. Machine Design II. (3) Prerequisite: ETME 3213. A continuation of ETME 3213 with emphasis on new methods of problem solving and opportunities to integrate previously attained skills and knowledge into the design and optimization of small machine systems. (On demand)
ETME 3232. Senior Design Project I. (2)  Prerequisites: ETME 3113, 3133, and 3143. Corequisite or prerequisite: ETME 3213 or permission. First of a two-semester course sequence in which each student proposes and implements a senior-level design project which demonstrates abilities as developed by the coursework taken thus far. Each student uses project planning techniques to complete a project proposal and plans and makes substantial progress toward implementation in the first semester and completes the project, including design evaluation during the second semester. One class hour and three lab hours per week. ETME 3242. Senior Design Project II. (2) Prerequisite: ETME 3232. Pre- or corequisite: ETME 3163. Second of a two-semester course sequence in which each student proposes and implements a senior-level design project which demonstrates abilities as developed by the coursework taken thus far. Each student uses project planning techniques to complete a project proposal and plans and makes substantial progress toward implementation in the first semester and completes the project, including design evaluation during the second semester. One class hour and three lab hours per week. ETME 3244. Applied Heat Transfer. (3) Prerequisites: ETME 3133. Basic principles of heat transfer. Theory and applications of conduction, free and forced convection and radiation heat transfer. Heat exchangers and heat transfer measurement. (Fall)
ETME 3251. Instrumentation Laboratory. (1)  Prerequisite or corequisite: ETME 3163. Practice in the use of the various instrumentation devices studied in ETME 3163. ETME 3252. Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer Laboratory. (1)  Prerequisite or corequisite: ETME 3143. Experimentation involving the fundamental principles of thermodynamics and heat transfer, as applied to internal combustion engines, steam engines, engine dynamometers, refrigeration and heat pumps, solar energy systems, and heat exchangers. Three laboratory hours per week. ETME 3263. Fluid Power. (3) Prerequisite: ETME 3133. Mechanical and fluid power and the conversion of one to the other. Components and system efficiencies including those consisting of cascaded components. Performance evaluation of such hydraulic components as pumps, motors, valves and metering devices. Viscosity, bulk modulus, noise, optimum performance and system design will be considered. (On demand)
ETME 3273. Air Conditioning Systems. (3) Prerequisite: ETME 3143. Functions and operating characteristics of the major components of refrigerating machines, heat pumps, boilers, furnaces, solar collectors, heat exchangers, fans and pumps. Emphasis on sizing, economics and performance characteristics. Includes coverage of psychometric principles and fan and pump laws. (On demand)
ETME 3283. Modern Techniques in Energy Conservation and Utilization. (3) Prerequisite: ETME 3143 or permission of the instructor. Survey of current topics that may include solar energy, basic nuclear reactor technology, ammonia-based Rankine cycle, absorption refrigeration cycle, heat pump cycle, techniques for energy conservation in new construction and techniques for retrofitting existing energy utilization systems. (On demand)
ETME 4245. Energy Management. (3) Prerequisite: a working knowledge of engineering economics and thermodynamics. Study of the understanding and implementation of energy management techniques. Emphasis is on energy efficiency applications in homes, businesses, large buildings and industry. Topics include energy auditing, energy management, energy cost analysis, energy & electric rate structures, lighting, HVAC systems, motors & drivers, boilers and steam systems, cogeneration, commercial and industrial applications and alternative energy sources. (On demand)
ETMF 3111. Manufacturing Processes. (3) Capabilities, limitations, and operating characteristics of families of machine tools and processes; casting, cutting, forming, joining, fabrication, and inspection machinery. (On demand)
ETMF 3113. Fundamental of Optics. (3) Prerequisite: algebra, trigonometry, plane geometry, and physics. A phenomenological introduction to applied optics; interactions between light and materials; properties of light; lenses and mirrors; simple optical systems; interference and diffraction; introductions to optical fibers, lasers, and holography. (On demand)
ETMF 3114. Thin Films and Optical Coatings. (3) Prerequisite: algebra, trigonometry, plane geometry, and physics. Vacuum technology, process controls, and special techniques used in the fabrication of thin films and the surfaces on which they are prepared; ways in which the optical tribological, and electronic industries utilize these structures in their products. (On demand)
ETMF 3131. Computer Integrated Manufacturing (CIM). (3) Automated manufacturing systems involving computers to monitor vendor input, process variations, component selection and routing, and test and evaluation of products. Applications involving integration of computer aided design (CAD) systems with computer aided manufacturing (CAM) systems. (On demand)
ETMF 3141. Industrial Applied Optical Systems. (3) Prerequisite: ETGR 3171. The applications of electrooptical technology in manufacturing and industrial systems is investigated. The fundamentals of applied optics, laser theory and semi-conductor optical devices will be reviewed. (On demand)
ETMF 3141L. Applied Optical Systems Laboratory. (1) Corequisite: ETMF 3141. Applications of electrooptical technology in manufacturing systems. Laboratory experiments demonstrating the use of lasers in the following manufacturing and industrial applications will be performed: cutting, machining, welding, measurement, marking, and control of processes; machine vision systems, sorting, process control, and real-time quality control; bar code systems; optical character recognition; optical data transmission. (On demand)
ETMF 3153. Optics Laboratory. (2) Prerequisite or corequisite: ETMF 3113. Experiments designed to illustrate properties of light and optical systems; reflection and refraction; lenses and lens systems; optical instruments; interference and diffraction; polarized light; laser principles. (On demand)
ETMF 3181. Digital Process Control. (3) Prerequisite: ETMF 3164. Applications and programming of microprocessors and programmable controllers for control of manufacturing processes. Interfaces with sensors, actuators, and computer systems. Includes classroom and laboratory demonstrations. (On demand)
ETMF 3211. Topics in Precision Manufacturing. (3) Senior seminar in selected areas of modern production of both conventional and microminiaturized products; surface mount technology for electronic components; manufacturing in the clean room environment; metrology; manufacture of microminiature mechanical systems; vacuum coating and plating systems; systems for automatic process control and product inspection. (On demand)
ETMF 3251. CIM Laboratory. (2)  Experiments with computer control of processes, including numerical control and robotics. Measurement of physical variables for monitoring, controlling, and testing production operations. Application of microprocessors and micro computers to system control and status reporting. One class hour, three lab hours per week. (On demand)
ETMF 3490. Manufacturing Engineering Technology Practicum. (0) Directed individual study in a selected area of Manufacturing Engineering Technology exploring the practical applications and practices in industry or research. (On demand)
EXER 1099. Topics in Games/Exercise/Sports. (1-3) Specialized topics or innovations in games, exercise, and sports. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (On demand)
EXER 1201. Foundations of Physical Conditioning. (2) Prerequisite: Must be a PKNS, ATRN or EXER major. The application and basic science of physical training programs designed to improve and maintain physical fitness. (Fall, Spring)
EXER 1202. Weight Training. (1) Mechanics and programming of weight training. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
EXER 1203. Fencing. (1) The skills and rules of the sport of fencing. (On demand)
EXER 1204. Aerobic Fitness. (1) Exercise designed to develop and maintain physical fitness through aerobic activity to music. (Fall, Spring)
EXER 1206. Adaptive and Developmental Physical Education. (1) Prerequisite: permission of the instructor. Prescribed ameliorative exercises adapted to individuals with special needs, capacities and interests. (On demand)
EXER 1208. Walk, Jog, Run. (1) Principles of walking, jogging and running as modes for improving and maintaining cardiovascular health and physical fitness. (Fall, Spring)
EXER 1209. Step Aerobics. (1) Physical fitness training emphasizing aerobic conditioning via variations and combinations of step patterns on adjustable exercise benches. (Fall, Spring)
EXER 1210. Beginning Swimming. (1) For weak swimmers or nonswimmers. Instruction in water safety fundamentals, basic body positioning, maneuvering in water, and traveling skills, including basic strokes. (Fall, Spring)
EXER 1211. Intermediate Swimming. (1) Emphasis on gaining competency in at least four basic strokes and increasing endurance. Instruction in water safety, non-swimming rescues and lap swimming for fitness. (Fall, Spring)
EXER 1215. Aquatic Fitness. (1) Principles of safety and effectiveness of aquatic exercise as a mode for improving and maintaining general health and physical fitness. (Spring)
EXER 1220. Beginning Tennis. (1) The rules, basic skills and strategy. (Fall)
EXER 1222. Racquet Sports. (1) Basic skills, tactics, safety and rules of racquetball, court and table tennis, squash and badminton. (Spring)
EXER 1223. Beginning Badminton. (1) The rules, basic skills and strategy. (On demand)
EXER 1231. Introduction to Outdoor Adventure. (1) An introduction to outdoor adventure through participation in a variety of weekend outdoor trips offered by Venture. Discussions and written reflection will expand students’ sense of self, and their connection with others and with the natural environment. A special fee will be charged to cover the costs of the weekend trips. (Fall, Spring)
EXER 1232. Orienteering. (1) Introduction of off trail navigation with emphasis in the use of topographic maps, compasses, and route finding for wilderness travel; and the sport of competitive orienteering. Weekly class and 1 or 2 Saturday meets. (Spring) (Alternate years)
EXER 1233. Rock Climbing. (1) Introduction to rock climbing with emphasis on belaying and safety systems, climbing techniques, and the metaphorical and psychological aspects of climbing. Course will include: classroom sessions, use of indoor climbing wall, and weekend trips to outdoor climbing sites. A special fee will be charged to cover the costs of the weekend trips. (Fall, Spring)
EXER 1234. Canoeing. (1) Prerequisite: Successful completion of water safety test. Introduction to canoeing on flat water and white water emphasizing basic strokes, river reading, and boating safety. 10 classroom sessions and 2 weekend days. (Spring)
EXER 1235. Challenge Course Activities. (1) Immersion in a developmental small group team experience using a wide variety of challenge course activities (i.e. ropes course, trust exercises, group initiatives.) The focus is on expanding students’ self knowledge and understanding of how to work effectively with and lead others. (Spring)
EXER 1240. Beginning Golf. (1) The grip, stance, stroke, use and selection of clubs, rules and etiquette. (Fall, Spring)
EXER 1242. Archery. (1) The fundamental skills and selection, care and repair of equipment. (On demand)
EXER 1250. Volleyball. (1) The rules, fundamental skills and strategies. (Fall, Spring)
EXER 1262. Recreational Dance. (1) Social and partner dancing in a recreational setting. Basic knowledge of dance steps, dance music, style, leading/following techniques, plus current popular variations. (On demand)
EXER 1263. Body Shaping. (1) Selected methods of resistive exercises used to shape, tone and define musculature in a gymnasium setting. (Fall, Spring)
EXER 2150. Introduction to Kinesiology. (3) Crosslisted as ATRN 2150. Prerequisite: Must be a PKNS major (open to all students during summer session). Introduction to the study of health fitness relative to philosophies, practices, work settings, trends, knowledge bases, skills and licensures. (Spring, Summer)
EXER 2212. Lifeguard Training. (3) Prerequisite: Swim 300 yards using a combination of front crawl and breast stroke continuously, swim 20 yards, dive to 10 feet and retrieve a dive brick, return. The knowledge and skills associated with lifeguarding. Qualifying students will receive the American Red Cross Lifeguarding Certificate. (Fall, Spring)
EXER 2213. Water Safety Instruction. (3) Prerequisite: Competency in all basic swimming strokes. Techniques used in teaching people aquatic skills. Qualifying students will receive the American Red Cross Water Safety Instructor’s rating. (Spring)
EXER 2218. Scuba Diving Laboratory. (1) Corequisite: EXER 2219. Prerequisite: appropriate swimming ability to current scuba standards as prescribed by recognized scuba certifying organizations. The skills associated with the use of self-contained underwater breathing apparatus. There is a course fee. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
EXER 2219. Scuba Diving. (2) Corequisite: EXER 2218. The science associated with the use of selfcontained underwater breathing apparatus. Students who demonstrate the required knowledge and skills may request licensure as an open water SCUBA diver. There is a $60 course fee. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
EXER 2220. Advanced Scuba Diving. (1) Prerequisite: Certified Open Water Diver. The knowledge and skill required for underwater navigation, search and recovery, limited visibility diving and deep diving. There is a $35 course fee. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
EXER 2230. Wilderness Experience. (3) Corequisite: EXER 2231. This course is, in essence, a semester-long Outward Bound experience. It uses a variety of group experiences and adventure activities, including backpacking trips and challenge courses. The goal is a deeper understanding of oneself and of life itself through participation in an in-depth group experience. Significant attention is given to self reflection. Field experiences during class and two weekend trips. (Fall)
EXER 2231. Wilderness Experience Lab. (1) Corequisite: EXER 2230 . The lab will focus on the skills and knowledge necessary for planning and conducting one’s own backpacking trips. The lecture course (EXER 2230) uses the experiences from the lab to increase self knowledge. Two weekend backpacking trips are included. A special fee will be charged to cover the costs of the trips. (Fall)
EXER 2232. Wilderness Trip Leading. (2) Prerequisite: EXER 1231 or EXER 2230 or permission of instructor. The focus is on the broadly accepted skills and knowledge necessary for leading group adventure trips. Includes spring break backpacking trip(s) and class room sessions. After successful completion of this course students will be eligible to assist with Venture trips. A special fee will be charged to cover the costs of the trips. (Spring)
EXER 2234. Challenge Course Facilitation. (2) Prerequisite: EXER 1235 or EXER 2230 or permission of instructor. Focus on the basic skills and knowledge necessary for safely and effectively leading groups through challenge courses. In addition to class room sessions, weekend days at the Team Challenge Course and observation/ apprenticing of actual Venture programs are required. (Spring)
EXER 2235. High Ropes Course Facilitation. (2) Prerequisite: EXER 1235, 2230 or 2234 or permission of instructor. Focus on both the technical and facilitation skills and the knowledge necessary for safely and effectively leading groups through high ropes courses. In addition to class room sessions, weekend days at the High Team Challenge Course and observation/ apprenticing of actual Venture programs are required. (Fall)
EXER 2251. Introduction to Human Movement: A Personal Approach. (3) Selected methods of observing and analyzing human movement via selfobservation and study. (On demand)
EXER 2290. First Aid: Responding to Emergencies. (3) Cross-listed as ATRN 2290. Prerequisite: PKNS major. The knowledge and skills associated with being a first responder in case of injury or sudden illness. Qualifying students may receive certifications in: Responding to Emergencies-First Aid, CPR/AED for the Professional Rescuer, Preventing Disease Transmission (Bloodborne Pathogens Training) and Automated External Defibrillator (AED). Open to all students during summer session. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
EXER 2294. Care and Prevention of Athletic Injuries. (3) Cross-listed as ATRN 2294. Prerequisite or corequisite: EXER 2290 or ATRN 2290, and must be a PKNS major. Focus on health care competencies necessary for the prevention, emergency management and acute care of athleticrelated injuries. Also provides an introduction to the role of the Certified Athletic Trainer in providing health to the physically active individual. (Spring)
EXER 2295. Care and Prevention of Athletic Injuries Laboratory. (1) Prerequisite: Must be a PKNS major. Corequisite: EXER or ATRN 2294. Focus on the psychomotor competencies and clinical proficiencies necessary for the prevention, emergency management and acute care of athletic-related injuries. (Spring)
EXER 2298. Applied Kinesiology. (3) Cross-listed as ATRN 2298. Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in BIOL 1273, BIOL 1273L, and PKNS major. The study of musculoskeletal anatomy and how it relates to normal function of the human body. (Spring)
EXER 2333. Baseball Through History and Playing. (3) This course first explores the socioeconomic climate of baseball’s origins from the 1800s to the present. The second half provides activity-oriented instruction that introduces softball’s emergence from baseball through basic skills, rules, and strategies of the game. (Spring)
EXER 3099. Movement Problems/Topics. (1-6) Prerequisite: permission of instructor. Movement problems/topics chosen by the student which relate to special areas of interest. May be repeated for credit with approval of instructor. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
EXER 3100. Exercise Leadership and Instruction. (3) Prerequisite or corequisite: EXER 1201 and an EXER major. This course introduces principles and methods of leadership. Includes programming and participation, teaching methods, assessment, supervision, and leadership for various types of individual and group health and fitness programs. This course will also review basic exercise science principles and provide the student with the knowledge and skills to lead a wide variety of related activities. (Fall)
EXER 3152. Health and Safety Issues in Middle and Secondary Schools. (2) Prerequisites: Junior or senior status, EDUC 2100 and SPED 2100. Provides the pre-service teacher with the curricular content of health and safety in grades 6-12. Focuses on knowledge and behaviors conducive to health and safety. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
EXER 3200. Adaptive Physical Education. (3) Prerequisite: admission to teacher education program. Study of movement potentials and limitations of mentally and physically impaired children and teaching skills necessary to use movement as a medium for physical, social and emotional development. (On demand)
EXER 3228. Elementary Physical Activity. (2) Prerequisites: a grade of C or better in EDUC 2100, ELED 3120, SPED 2100, and acceptance into the Teacher Education Program. Integrating physical activity with elementary school curriculums. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
EXER 3229. Elementary Health Education. (2) Prerequisites: a grade of C or better in EDUC 2100, ELED 3120, SPED 2100, and acceptance into the Teacher-Education program. Orientation of the elementary specialist to content and curriculum appropriate for teaching health education in grades K- 6. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
EXER 3233. Teaching Children Movement. (3) Prerequisites: EDUC 2100, 2110 and 2150. Study of movement and physical activities as applied in the elementary school program. Emphasis on teaching lessons at a local elementary school. (On demand)
EXER 3251. Human Movement. (3) Prerequisite: EXER 2251 or permission of instructor. Analysis and application of basic movement in specific sport, dance, gymnastic, and aquatic skills. (On demand)
EXER 3260. Nutrition for the Physically Active. (3) Cross-listed as ATRN 3260. Prerequisite: must be a EXER or ATRN major. Corequisite: EXER 3280. Introduction to principles and concepts of nutrition and how dietary practices affect health and disease. (Fall)
EXER 3280. Exercise Physiology. (3) Cross-listed as ATRN 3280. Prerequisites: must be a EXER or ATRN major. Physiological foundations of programming exercise for health fitness with emphasis on acute physiological responses to bouts of exercise and chronic physiological responses and adaptations to repeated exercise and programs of exercise. EXER 3281. Exercise Physiology Laboratory. (1)  Cross-listed as ATRN 3281. Corequisite: EXER 3280 Laboratory experiences and assignments to enhance the lecture material presented in EXER 3280. (Fall)
EXER 3285. Conditioning for Maximum Sports Performance. (3) Prerequisite: EXER 2290 or permission of instructor. A study of biomechanical and physiological principles of conditioning for maximum sports performance. Two lecture and three laboratory hours. (On demand)
EXER 3286. Exercise Testing. (3) Cross-listed as ATRN 3286. Prerequisite: a grade of C or better in EXER 3280 or ATRN 3280 and EXER 3281 or ATRN 3281. Corequisite: EXER 3287. This course is designed to teach methods and protocols for collecting and interpreting information collected on individuals concerning various fitness parameters for the future development of individual and group conditioning programs. (Spring)
EXER 3287. Exercise Testing Lab. (1)  Crosslisted as ATRN 3287. Corequisite: EXER 3286. Practitioner lab in the use of appropriate data collection methods and protocols. (Spring)
EXER 4121. Pharmacology for the Physically Active. (3) Cross-listed as ATRN 4121. Prerequisite: A grade of C or better in EXER 3260 or ATRN 3260. The course entails an examination of the historical aspects of use, abuse and addiction within the realm of health and human performance. This course will expose students to a wide variety of drug issues and the unique use and abuse patterns of individuals in the exercise science arena. (Fall)
EXER 4130. Applied Nutrition. (3) Principles of nutrition, dietary guidelines, dietary relationships to diseases and health, special populations, computerized dietary analysis. (2 year cycle)
EXER 4132. Lifetime Weight Management. (3) Prerequisites: a grade of C or better in EXER 3260 or ATRN 3260 and EXER 4286. Examines factors in obesity and weight control, emphasizing techniques in behavior modification and lifestyle change for effective weight management. 7½ week course. (Spring)
EXER 4134. Assessment and Development of Physical Fitness. (3) Prerequisite: permission of the instructor. Study of responses and adaptations to exercise, assessment techniques, exercise prescription, leadership and programming. (2 year cycle)
EXER 4204. Perceptual Motor Development. (3) Theories, principles and research related to perceptual motor development of children. (On demand)
EXER 4205. Perceptual Motor Learning. (3) Prerequisite or corequisite: EXER 4204 or permission of instructor. Perceptual-motor learning of children and its effect on school performance and the relationships of perceptual-motor development to reading, writing and mathematics. (On demand)
EXER 4208. Perceptual Motor Therapy. (3) Prerequisite: EXER 4205 or permission of the instructor. Observation of and evaluation and therapy for children with perceptual-motor delays. (On demand)
EXER 4210. Perceptual Motor Therapy Laboratory. (1) Prerequisite/corequisite EXER 4204, 4205, or 4208. (On demand)
EXER 4211. Perceptual Motor Therapy Laboratory. (2) Prerequisites/corequisite: EXER 4204 or 4208. (On demand)
EXER 4212 . Perceptual Motor Therapy Laboratory. (3) Prerequisite: EXER 4208, 4210, or 4210 and permission of instructor. Supervised observation, testing and clinical teaching of children with perceptual-motor dysfunction. EXER 4286. Exercise Prescription. (3) Cross-listed as ATRN 4286. Prerequisite: Successful completion of EXER 3286 or ATRN 3286 and EXER 3287 or ATRN 3287. This course is designed to teach the interpretation and prescription of exercise and various fitness parameters for programs with healthy populations and general clinical populations. (Fall)
EXER 4293. Biomechanics. (3) Cross-listed as ATRN 4293. Prerequisites: a grade of C or better in EXER 3280 or ATRN 3280. Corequisite: EXER 4294. This course provides an introduction to the study of physics principles as they govern human movement, as well as understanding how the neuromuscular system controls human movement. Additionally, this course covers the mechanical principles that underlie musculoskeletal injury, as well as the influence that gender and ethnicity may have on various musculoskeletal pathologies. (Fall)
EXER 4294. Biomechanics Lab. (1)  Cross-listed as ATRN 4294. Corequisite: EXER 4293. Laboratory experiences and assignments to enhance the lecture material presented in EXER 4293. One laboratory period of two hours a week or two one hour labs. (On demand)
EXER 4490. Exercise Science Senior Internship. (6- 15) Prerequisites: Completion of all other courses for the major with a grade of C or better. Application of acquired knowledge and skills in practitioner settings. This internship course requires a minimum of 225 contact hours at the internship site. Typically offered during the second half of the spring term. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
EXER 4660. Practitioner Seminar. (3) (W, O) Prerequisites: a grade of C or better in EXER 4121, EXER 4286 and EXER 4293. Must be taken during the term closest to internship (EXER 4990). Emphasis is on contemporary practices regarding exercise, health and wellness. This course also is designed to help students prepare for relevant certification exams. 7½ week course. (Spring)
FILM 2201. Introduction to Film. (3) Introduction to elements of film needed for analyzing and writing about film. Required for Minor in Film Studies. (Fall, Spring)
FILM 3050. Topics in Film. (3) National film histories, film analysis, film criticism, film genres. May be repeated as topic changes. FILM 3120. The Fundamentals of Video/Film Production. (3) Key components: planning and preparation through post-production and presentation, including writing a simple screenplay, storyboarding, locating equipment, casting, shooting, editing, post production synchronization, and exhibition. FINANCE (FINN) FINN 3000. Topics in Finance. (3) Prerequisite: junior standing. Topics from the area of Finance. The course may be repeated for credit. (On demand)
FINN 3120. Financial Management. (3) Prerequisites: MATH 1120, STAT 1220; ACCT 2121, 2122, ECON 2101, 2102; INFO 2130; Business major, junior standing. Principles and problems of financial aspects of managing capital structure, leastcost asset management, planning and control. Computer application will be included where appropriate. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
FINN 3221. Financial Institutions and Markets. (3) Prerequisite: FINN 3120. A study of financial institutions and money and capital markets which considers their roles in the intermediation process. Special emphasis is focused on the comparative financial policies of financial institutions considered in the context of their market environments. (Fall)
FINN 3222. Investments. (3) Prerequisite: FINN 3120. Major topics are security analysis and portfolio management. The viewpoint is that of the investment professional concerned with evaluation of individual securities and management of security portfolios. (Fall, Spring)
FINN 3223. International Financial Management. (3) Prerequisite: FINN 3120. Viewpoints are those of the senior financial officer of a corporation involved in international business and of the international officer of a commercial bank. Topics include the financing of exports and imports, financing of foreign operations, problems of foreign exchange rates and the impact of accounting procedures on financial management. (Fall)
FINN 3224. Applied Business Finance. (3) Prerequisite: FINN 3120. Case studies of the theories and techniques of financial management as they relate to the goal of the financial manager; the maximization of the value of the firm. Topics include financial planning, valuation, financial instruments, financial structure, and capital budgeting. (On demand)
FINN 3225. Commercial Bank Management. (3) Prerequisite: FINN 3120. A study of sound and efficient techniques for the management of commercial banks. Topics include industry structure, administrative organization, and management of assets, liabilities and capital. (Spring)
FINN 3226. Financial Theory and Practice. (3) Prerequisite: FINN 3120. Modern financial theory and its application, including risk theory, market equilibrium asset pricing models, efficient market theory, capital structure theory and applications (including issues surrounding financial distress and bankruptcy), dividend policy, agency problems, informational asymmetry, advanced topics in capital budgeting, and leasing. (Fall, Spring)
FINN 3261. Real Estate Finance. (3) Prerequisite: FINN 3120. This course covers the fundamentals of real estate finance and investment and includes the topics of: real estate capital markets, mortgage markets, mortgage securitization, real estate contracts and leases, investment analysis, valuation and appraisal, return and risk considerations, and the effects of debt financing, taxation and government regulations on real estate investment. (Spring)
FINN 3271. Principles of Risk Management and Insurance. (3) Prerequisite: INFO 2130, junior standing, business major or permission of the department. A study of the different types of nonspeculative risks faced by individuals and businesses and the possible alternative methods of treating such risks. An examination of the specific application of these methods with regard to life, health, property, casualty, and liability contracts. (Fall, Spring)
FINN 3272. Life Insurance and Professional Financial Planning. (3) Prerequisite: INFO 2130, junior standing, business major or permission of the department. This course explains the uses of life insurance, annuities, health insurance and Social Security in the financial planning context. It explains the integration of social security benefits, employerprovided benefits, and individually purchased life insurance and investments into comprehensive financial plans. Students successfully completing this course should understand the need for the main techniques of financial planning in contemporary U.S. society. (Fall, Spring)
FINN 3273. Property and Casualty. (3) Prerequisite: INFO 2130, junior standing, business major or permission of the department. Involves an analysis of the needs of business and individuals for property and casualty insurance and the nature of available coverage. An examination of property and casualty insurance products is included, emphasizing the study of case law, the use of contracts and contract language underwriting procedures, actuarial science, reinsurance, accounting, non-insurance risk transfer, and claims handling. (Fall)
FINN 3275. Advanced Risk Management. (3) Prerequisites: FINN 3271 (or permission of department chair). Provides an in depth analysis of techniques that firms can use to handle nonspeculative pure risks. Risk handling devices and how they are applied to business problems are discussed. Some of the techniques examined include self-insurance, captives, financial instruments and retention. Included is an analysis of loss data and how it can be utilized to select a risk handling technique. (Fall, Spring)
FINN 3276. Employee Benefits. (3) Prerequisites: INFO 2130, junior standing, and a business major. Provides an analysis of group plans (e.g., medical, life, disability, and retirement), stock options, profit sharing plans and statutory benefits (e.g., workers’ compensation and social security). Includes a review of legislation affecting these plans. Non-traditional plans (e.g., child care, flex time, and wellness programs) are also examined. (Spring)
FINN 3277. Legal Aspects of Insurance. (3) Prerequisite: FINN 3271. Provides an in-depth analysis of the impact that statutes, regulations and litigation have on risk management and insurance. Will examine the impact the courts have had on claims handling. (On demand)
FINN 3500. Cooperative Education and 49ership Experience. (0) Enrollment in this course is for the University cooperative education and 49ership students during each semester they are working in a position. Acceptance into the Experiential Learning Program by the University Career Center is required. Participating students pay a course registration fee for transcript notation (49ership and co-op) and receive full-time student status (co-op only). Assignments must be arranged and approved in advance. Course may be repeated; evaluation is Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory. Only open to undergraduate students; Graduate level students are encouraged to contact their academic departments to inquire about academic or industrial internship options for credit. For more information, contact the University Career Center. (Fall, Spring)
FINN 3800. Directed Study. (1-3) Prerequisites: Permission of the department and junior standing. Enrollment granted only by permission of the faculty with whom the work will be performed. The student's work assignments will be designed by the student and faculty member who will oversee the project of study. The credit hours will be determined prior to enrollment and will be based on the particular project undertaken. (On demand)
FINN 4158. Student Managed Investment Fund I. (3) Prerequisites: FINN 3120 and FINN 3222. Management of an actual portfolio consisting of a portion of the University’s Endowment Fund. Admission is by permission of instructor. Students selected for the course are required to take FINN 4159. (Fall)
FINN 4159. Student Managed Investment Fund II. (3) Prerequisites: FINN 3120 and FINN 3222. Management of an actual portfolio consisting of a portion of the University’s Endowment Fund. Admission is by permission of instructor. Student cannot enroll in this course without successfully completing FINN 4158. (Spring)
FREN 1050. Special Approaches to the Study of French. (1-6) Course may be repeated with change of topic. (On demand)
FREN 1201. Elementary French I. (4) For students with limited or no previous experience in French. First course in a two-course sequence to develop competence in culture, speaking and writing, listening and reading comprehension in French. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
FREN 1202. Elementary French II. (4) Prerequisite: FREN 1201 or equivalent. Second course in a twocourse sequence to develop competence in culture, speaking and writing, listening and reading comprehension in French. (Fall, Spring, Summer)(Evenings)
FREN 2050. Topics in French I. (1-3) Course may be repeated with a change in topic. (On demand)
FREN 2200. French for Reading Knowledge. (3) Prerequisite: FREN 1202 or equivalent. Review of French grammar with emphasis on developing reading skills. Taught in English. Does not count for major or minor credit. (Fall and/or Spring). FREN 2201. Intermediate French I. (3) Prerequisite: FREN 1202 or equivalent. Review of grammar, with reinforcement and expansion of competence in speaking, understanding, reading, and writing, in a cultural context. (Fall, Spring)
FREN 2202. Intermediate French II. (3) Prerequisite: FREN 2201 or permission of the department. Conversation and composition based on readings in French literature and culture. Film and slide presentations. (Fall, Spring)
FREN 2207. French Phonetics. (3) Prerequisite: FREN 1202 or permission of the department. Study of the sounds of the French language, their production and representation by means of the International Phonetic Alphabet. Practice in reading and speaking with proper rhythm and intonation. (Fall)
FREN 2209. French Civilization. (3)  Conducted in English. No knowledge of French required. Open to majors and non-majors for elective credit. A study of the French people, past and present, with emphasis on cross-cultural contrasts in attitudes and values. (Fall, Spring)
FREN 2210. Introduction to Business French. (3) Prerequisite: FREN 2201or permission of the department. Introduction to spoken and written language of the French-speaking business world. Acquisition of and practice with general commercial terminology used in French for such functional business areas as economics, management, marketing finance, and import-export. (Alternate to FREN 2202 only for Certificate in Business French) (On demand)
FREN 3050. Topics in French. (1-3) Course may be repeated with change of topic. (On demand)
FREN 3201. French Grammar and Conversation. (3)  Prerequisite: FREN 2202 or permission of the department. Review of French grammar and guided conversation on prepared topics. Emphasis on spoken French. (Fall)
FREN 3202. French Grammar and Composition. (3) Prerequisites: FREN 2202 and 2207 or concurrent enrollment in FREN 2207. FREN 3201 recommended. Review of French grammar and guided compositions on prepared topics. Emphasis on vocabulary, idiomatic expressions, and stylistics. (Spring)
FREN 3203. Introduction to French Literature. (3) Prerequisite: FREN 2202. Corequisite: FREN 3202 or permission of the department. Development of techniques for literary study through analysis of selected major works in French literature. Readings, discussions, presentations, and explications de texte. (Spring)
FREN 3209. France Today. (3) Prerequisite: FREN 3201 or 3202 or permission of the department. Contemporary France: institutions, society, culture. (Fall)
FREN 3800. Directed Individual Study. (1-3) Prerequisite: permission of the department; normally open only to French majors and minors. Individual work on a selected area of study. To be arranged with the instructor, generally during the preceding semester, and by special permission only. May be repeated for credit. (On demand)
FREN 4003. Studies in French Literature. (3) Prerequisites: FREN 3201, 3202, and 3203 or permission of the department. Course may be repeated with change of topic. (On demand)
FREN 4005. Studies in the French Language. (3) Prerequisites: FREN 3201 and 3202, or permission of the department. Course may be repeated with change of topic. (On demand)
FREN 4007. Studies in French Culture and Civilization. (3) Prerequisites: FREN 3201, 3202, and 3209, or permission of the department. Course may be repeated with change of topic. (On demand)
FREN 4050. Topics in French. (1-3) Prerequisites: Junior standing; English 1102 or equivalent if taught in English. May be taught in French or English. Will not count toward the major. Course may be repeated with change of topic. (On demand)
FREN 4120. Advanced Business French I. (3) Prerequisites: FREN 2210, 3201 and an additional 3000- or 4000-level course (3202 recommended), or permission of the department. Advanced studies in Business French, with intensive practice in speaking, listening comprehension, reading, writing, and translation in functional business areas such as economics, management, and marketing. (On demand)
FREN 4121. Advanced Business French II. (3) Prerequisites: FREN 2210, 3201, and an additional 3000-or 4000-level course (3202 recommended), or permission of the department. Advanced studies in Business French, with intensive practice in speaking, listening comprehension, reading, writing, and translation in functional business areas such as marketing, finance, and import-export. (On demand)
FREN 4201. Survey of French Literature I. (3) Prerequisite: FREN 3203. The major literary movements from the Middle Ages to the Enlightenment, with sample texts. Emphasis on continuity and change. (Fall, Odd years)
FREN 4202. Survey of French Literature II. (3) Prerequisite: FREN 3203. The major literary movements from the Enlightenment to the contemporary period, with sample texts. Emphasis on continuity and change. (Fall, Even years)
FREN 4410. Professional Internship in French. (1-6) Prerequisites: FREN 3201 and 3202, or equivalent and permission of the department. Facultysupervised field and/or research experience in a cooperating professional (e.g., business) or community organization. Contents of internship based upon a contractual agreement among the student, department, and business or community organization. Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
FREN 4800. Directed Individual Study. (1-3) Prerequisite: permission of the department; normally open only to French majors and minors. Individual work on a selected area of study. To be arranged with the instructor, generally during the preceding semester, and by special permission only. May be repeated for credit. (On demand)
GEOG 1101. World Regional Geography. (3) A world regional study which emphasizes the distinctly human responses of people to various geographic situations throughout the world. The nature and development of cultural regions will be studied. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
GEOG 1105. The Location of Human Activity. (3) An examination of factors which account for the locational characteristics of economic and other human activities. The locational decision-making process is examined as a means of understanding human spatial behavior. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
GEOG 2000. Topics in Geography. (1-4) Treatment of major topical or regional issues in Geography. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (On demand)
GEOG 2100. Maps and Graphs. (3) A study of cartography and its essential processes, with particular emphasis on the map as a communication system, the effective communication of data by means of graphical symbols, map interpretation and discussion of map production techniques. (Fall, Spring) (Evenings)
GEOG 2101. Cartographic Laboratory. (1) Prerequisite or corequisite: GEOG 2100. The laboratory emphasizes thematic mapping and design. This includes basic map construction techniques, including desktop mapping with computers. Two hours of laboratory per week. (Fall, Spring) (Evenings)
GEOG 2103. Elements of GIScience and Technologies. (4) This course covers the fundamentals of Geographic Information Science (GIS), related technologies used in GIS, and how GIScience is being applied in such diverse fields as planning, marketing, criminal justice, health, natural resources, information technology and engineering. Students will learn the processes to collect, organize, analyze and display geographic data using GIS and will be introduced to related technologies including GPS, Air Photo-Interpretation and basics of Remote Sensing. Students will also cover mapping basics including scale, projections, coordinate systems, data classification, and cartographic design. (Fall, Spring)
GEOG 2105. Introduction to Economic Geography. (3) Examination of the spatial dimensions of economic activity, geographic organization and interaction of economic production, consumption, and exchange systems. Emphasis is placed on locationbased factors and principles utilizing theoretical and empirical studies. A variety of geographic scales will be examined, from the local to the global. (Spring)
GEOG 2110. Introduction to Geographic Research. (3) Research design and resources in geographic research. Emphasis on spatial applications in summary statistics; spatial summaries, statistical hypothesis testing; sampling and estimation; association, correlation and regression. (Fall, Spring)
GEOG 2120. Geographic Information Systems: Survey of Applications and Techniques. (4) Covers the fundamentals of GIS technology and how it is being applied in such diverse fields as planning, marketing, criminal justice, political science, and engineering. Students will learn how to collect, organize, analyze, and display spatial data obtained from sources such as address geocoding, GPS, and WWW sites. Each student will complete a series of lab exercises that illustrate the typical steps in a GIS project. Three lecture hours, one two-hour lab per week. (Fall, Spring)
GEOG 2125. Business Applications of GIS. (3) Introduction to the uses of spatial data and the geographic information systems that handle them in basic business decision-making and research. Applications include geographic data presentation, consumer research, marketing, site selection and trade area analysis. Students are provided an introduction to key economic geography concepts, data availability, and experience executing GIS projects. This course is an acceptable prerequisite for GEOG 4120. (Spring)
GEOG 2140. Geography of North Carolina. (3) A survey of the cultural, economic, urban, environmental and physical landscape of North Carolina with an emphasis on understanding the complex geographical variety that exists within a dynamic Southern state. Historic, current and future geographic patterns will be explored. (Spring) (On demand)
GEOG 2150. Geography of Polar Regions. (3) Arctic and Antarctic regions, history of exploration, the physical environment and political significance. (Yearly)
GEOG 2155. Geography of the U.S. and Canada. (3) Geographic structure of the U.S. and Canada with emphasis on physical environment and patterns of human activities. (Fall)
GEOG 2160. The South. (3) The culture, environment, population and economy of the southeastern U.S.; emphasis on current trends and future implications. (Yearly)
GEOG 2165. Patterns of World Urbanization. (3)  Introduction to cities of the world including examination of cities within different culture areas as well as the internal structure of different cities within the context of traditional and innovative theories of development geography. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
GEOG 2200. Introduction to Urban Studies. (3) Cross-listed with URBS 2200. A survey course exploring the diverse perspectives and experience of North American Cities. Lectures and discussions will focus on the development, organization, function, and meaning of urban areas, as well as the multiple and complex relationships that exist between cities and the people who live and work within them. (Fall, Spring)
GEOG 3000. Topics in Regional Geography. (3) Examination of major geographical regions of the world. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (Yearly)
GEOG 3100. The City and Its Region. (3) Study of the regional system of cities in terms of their size, spacing, historical evolution, functional relationships and future prospects. (Fall, Spring)
GEOG 3105. Geography of the Global Economy. (3) Examination of the globalization of economic activity with focus on the geographic patterns of international production, trade, and foreign direct investment and changes in these patterns resulting from actions by transnational corporations and nation states within a volatile technological environment. (Spring)
GEOG 3110. Urban Political Geography. (3) Spatial organization of metropolitan America. How metropolitan residents organize space into territorial units and the human, social and political ramifications of that organization. Spatial consequences of the most common modes of political, administrative and territorial organization. (Alternate years)
GEOG 3115. Urban Transportation Problems. (3)  Problems associated with moving goods, people and information in urban areas. Topics include mass transit and pollution problems. (Alternate years)
GEOG 3150. Manufacturing Geography. (3) Factors relating to the nature, locations and development of manufacturing industries. Emphasis upon classification of manufacturers, principal areas of manufacturing and the role of manufacturing in regional development. (Spring) (Evenings)
GEOG 3200. Land Use Planning. (3) Land use planning, with emphasis on basic planning processes, implementation techniques and strategies, and issues confronting contemporary urban and rural planning. (Spring)
GEOG 3205. Internal Structure of the City. (3) Integrative study of the spatial structure of cities with emphasis on land use patterns and models, transportation systems, residential concentrations, commercial activities and manufacturing zones. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
GEOG 3210. Regional Planning. (3) Introduction to regional planning strategies and approaches developed by regional planning agencies. Urban-regional planning relationships with emphasis on techniques used in regional analysis. (Spring)
GEOG 3215. Environmental Planning. (3)  Interaction and relationships between natural and human-made elements of the environment with emphasis on planning concepts and methodologies used in contemporary environmental planning. (Fall)
GEOG 3250. World Food Problems. (3) Magnitude, consequences, major causes and potential solutions to the world's food problems. (On demand)
GEOG 3260. Medical Geography. (3) Traditional aspects of medical geography including disease mapping, disease ecology and statistical association and more recent social scientific topics, including disease diffusion, health care facilities planning and spatial behavior. (On demand)
GEOG 3265. Behavioral Geography. (3)  Behavioral approach to environmental decisionmaking, personal space, room and building geography, consumer behavior, territoriality, perception of wilderness and natural hazards, activity space, and communication biases. (Fall)
GEOG 3500. Geography Cooperative Education and 49ership Experience. (0) Enrollment in this course is required for the department's geography cooperative education and 49ership students during each semester that they are working. Acceptance into the Experiential Learning Program by the University Career Center is required. Participating students pay a course registration fee for transcript notation (49ership and co-op) and receive full-time student status (co-op only). Assignments must be arranged and approved in advance. Course may be repeated; evaluation is Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory. Only open to undergraduate students; Graduate level students are encouraged to contact their academic departments to inquire about academic or industrial internship options for credit. For more information, contact the University Career Center. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
GEOG 3501. Geography Cooperative Education Seminar. (1) This course is required of geography cooperative education students in each semester following a work assignment for presentation of geography reports on the co-op learning experience. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
GEOG 3605. Geography of Europe.  (3) This course explores relevant issues in contemporary Europe. Through lecture and written work, the course examines current trends in European political unity, economic integration, national/ethnic conflict and environmental policy from a geographical perspective. GEOG 4000. Selected Topics in Geography. (3) Prerequisite: Permission of instructor. An intensive study of topics in geography from such areas as urban, manufacturing, planning, retailing activity, transportation, and political geography. Topics vary from semester to semester. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (Yearly)
GEOG 4040. Transportation Topics. (3) Prerequisite: Permission of department. Investigation of special topics in transportation including: transit systems, mobility and travel patterns, land use/transportation interface, air pollution, and information systems. (Spring) (Alternate years). GEOG 4101. Cartographic Techniques. (3) Prerequisite: GEOG 2100. Preparation of maps, figures and charts at a professional level of competence. Techniques to be emphasized include desktop mapping with computers, high resolution imagesetting output, color separation techniques which include computer separations as well as scribing and various related photographic processes. Two laboratories of three hours each per week. (Spring)
GEOG 4102. Cartographic Design and Map Construction. (3) Design process and basic map construction techniques with particular emphasis on the graphic elements of map design, planning map design, creating visual hierarchies, the uses of color, and basic mechanical color separation. (Fall)
GEOG 4103. Computer Programming for GIS Applications. (3) Prerequisite: GEOG 2103 or permission of instructor. Software program development for GIS and mapping applications using high level programming languages such as Visual Basic. Emphasis on the design and implementation of geographic data structures and algorithms. (Fall)
GEOG 4108. Sport, Place, and Development. (3)  Prerequisite: GEOG 1105. Examines sport and its impact on the landscape of cities and communities. Implications of sport are examined in terms of urban land use, urban social structure, markets, franchise movement and expansion, urban politics, its role in defining sense of place, and its impact on the development of communities and regions. (Fall, Alternate years)
GEOG 4120. Fundamentals of Geographic Information Systems. (4) Prerequisite: GEOG 2103 or permission of instructor. Development, current state-of-the-art and future trends in geographic information processing with emphasis on data gathering, storage, and retrieval, analytical capabilities and display technologies. A laboratory component will include development and completion of an applied GIS research project. Three lecture hours, one two-hour lab per week. (Fall, Spring)
GEOG 4130. Advanced Geographic Information Systems. (4) Prerequisite: GEOG 4120 or permission of instructor. Advanced GIS study with emphasis on (1) advanced skills for database development and management; (2) spatial analysis and modeling; and (3) Macro language programming and user interface design. Three lecture hours and a two-hour lab session each week. (Spring)
GEOG 4131. Environmental Modeling with GIS. (4) Prerequisite: GEOG 4120 or permission of the instructor. Theories and practices of modeling the environment with GIS. Topics include types of spatial modeling frameworks; GIS data sources and measurement technologies for environmental modeling; development, calibration, and validation of environmental models; 3-dimensional modeling and visualization of physical processes; and spatial analysis of human-environment interactions. (Fall or Spring)
GEOG 4132. Spatial Modeling for Social and Economical Applications. (4) Prerequisite: GEOG 4120 or permission of the instructor. Theories and practices of spatial modeling with social and economical applications. Topics include (1) simulation models for land use change, smart growth, object movement, and homeland security planning; (2) integrated models – spatial – non-spatial, topological – ontological, deterministic – stochastic; (3) agent-based models. Lab exercises employ various spatial modeling tools. (Fall or Spring)
GEOG 4140. Geographic Information Techniques for Community Planning. (4) Prerequisite: GEOG 4120 Introduction to Geographic Information Systems, one community planning class and/or permission of the instructor. This class is focused on the connection between community planning and geographic information techniques under the general framework of planning support systems (PSS). It is designed to help students develop knowledge, skills, and experience in the following areas. (1) municipal geographic database handling; (2) land suitability and feasibility assessment; (3) landscape aesthetics assessment; (4) sketch planning; and (5) systematic approaches to planning. A real work project from the Charlotte region will be conducted. A two-hour lab is required. GEOG 4150. Spatial Database Development with GPS and GIS. (4) Prerequisites: GEOG 4120, or permission of instructor. This course consists of tutorials, readings, projects, and discussions of how geo-technologies can be used to create digital geographic databases: designing conceptual databases using entity-relationship approach, transforming GPS data, geo-registering scanned base maps, digitizing vector features, entering attribute data, and developing Mobile GIS applications. (Fall or Spring)
GEOG 4155. Retail Location. (3) Spatial attributes of retailing and related activities. Location patterns, store location research, trade area delineation and consumer spatial behavior. (Spring)
GEOG 4160. The Geography of Transportation Systems. (3) Geographical and human factors that affect the movement of goods and people from place to place. Emphasis on transportation routes and networks, commodity flow patterns, and the locational implications of freight rates. (Spring)
GEOG 4209. Small Town Planning. (3) This course will explore small town population dynamics, ruralurban fringe land use dynamics, and changes in small towns’ community identity and sense of place. Emphasis will be placed on the issues and techniques that typify small town planning environments. Students will investigate these issues via field work and data collection at municipal scales within the Charlotte region. (Spring, alternate summers)
GEOG 4210. Urban Planning Methods. (3) Prerequisite: GEOG 3205 or permission of instructor. Scope and methods of urban planning. Emphasis on analytical techniques, projections, and data sources used in developing comprehensive planning tasks and strategies. (Fall)
GEOG 4220. Housing Policy. (3) Prerequisites: GEOG 1105 and at least one of GEOG 2200, GEOG 2165, GEOG 3100, GEOG 3205 or GEOG 3215, or permission of instructor. This course is designed to provide students a comprehensive overview of U.S. housing policy while honing their research and analytical skills. Topics covered will include the evolution of housing policy, how the provision of housing impacts urban spatial patterns, and the past and present role of housing on regional economic development, land use planning, environmental planning, transportation infrastructure, community revitalization, and social capital. (Fall)
GEOG 4255. Applied Population Analysis. (3) Population data sources; measuring population change; elementary projection and estimation techniques; spatial sampling; migration; survey design; applications in the public and private sectors. (Fall)
GEOG 4260. Transportation Policy Formulation. (3) Prerequisite: Permission of department. Structure of transportation policy at federal, state, and local levels including policies concerning highway financing and investments, congestion, safety, and use and development, energy, transit, and the provision of inter-city services. (Fall) (Alternate years)
GEOG 4265. Transportation Analysis Methods. (3) Prerequisite: Permission of department; statistics recommended. Procedures for analyzing the operation and performance of transportation systems; includes network planning models, minimum path algorithms and assignments; energy, air pollution, and activity analysis models; and research approaches, data sources, time and activity budgets, infrastructure condition and needs assessment. (Spring) (Alternate years)
GEOG 4270. Evaluation of Transportation Impacts. (3) Prerequisite: Permission of department. Methods and case studies for evaluating impacts and benefits of transportation investments including site-level impact analysis; project, corridor, and area scales; multi-modal evaluation and examination of mutually exclusive alternatives. (Fall) (Alternate years)
GEOG 4310. Urban Social Geography. (3) Prerequisites: GEOG 1105 and at least one of GEOG 2200, GEOG 2165, GEOG 3100, or GEOG 3205, or permission of the instructor. Examines the reflexive relationship between society and urban space. Explores the intersection between urban geography and social theory, the evolution of city, community and personal spaces, and the relations and constructions of class, race, gender, and sexuality that shape and are shaped by the urban spaces in which we live and work. (Spring)
GEOG 4400. Internship in Geography. (3-6) Prerequisite: Permission of the department. Research and/or work experience designed to be a logical extension of a student's academic program. The student must apply to department for an internship by submitting a proposal which specifies the type of work/research experience preferred and how the internship will complement his or her academic program. The student can receive three to six hours credit depending on the nature and extent of the internship assignment. (On demand)
GEOG 4405. Urban Field Geography. (3) Prerequisite: six hours of urban-related undergraduate courses or permission of instructor. Intensive field studies of cities of the Carolinas, including one-day and overnight trips to cities of the mountains and coastal areas. Emphasis on day study trips within the Piedmont. Exercises include land-use mapping, trip journals, interviews and comparisons of the results of zoning and urban development practices within satellite cities of the Charlotte Metropolitan Statistical Area. (Summer)
GEOG 4800. Individual Study in Geography. (1-4) Permission of department must be obtained and credit hours established in advance. Tutorial study or special research problems. May be repeated for credit. (On demand)
GEOL 1200. Physical Geology. (3) A study of the basic geological principles and processes in the earth sciences; the earth as a planet; treatment of physical processes shaping the earth; earth materials and landforms. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
GEOL 1200L. Physical Geology Laboratory. (1) Prerequisite or corequisite: GEOL 1200. Experimental study and investigation of the basic geological principles and processes in earth science; minerals, rocks, earth materials, and landforms. One lab period of three hours per week. Off-campus field trip required. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
GEOL 1210. Earth History. (3) Prerequisites: GEOL 1200. The origin and evolution of the earth's major features: the beginnings and changes of the earth's continents, atmosphere, oceans, and life forms, set in the vast context of geologic time. Three hours of lecture. (Fall, Spring)
GEOL 1210L. Earth History Lab. (1) Prerequisites: GEOL 1200, 1200L. Additional prerequisite or corequisite: GEOL 1210. Learn the basic techniques used by geologists to interpret the history of life, changing surface environments and habitats, plate tectonic movement, mountain building events, and climate changes. Hands-on investigation of rocks, fossils, geologic maps, and more. One lab period of three hours per week. Off campus field trip required. (Fall, Spring)
GEOL 2000. Topics in Geology. (1-4) Treatment of major topical issues in Geology. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (On demand)
GEOL 2020. The Planets. (3) Spacecraft exploration over the past 50 years has revealed the diversity and complexity of the Earth’s neighbors in space. This course is designed to explore the varied surface landscapes of planets and moons in the solar system and to understand the processes that created them. Topics for discussion will include the origin of the solar system, comparisons among the planetary bodies, and the processes which modify their surfaces (tectonics, volcanism, impact cratering, weather and climate, glaciations, and other processes). The spacecraft and sensors used to study planetary bodies will also be discussed. (Spring)
GEOL 2100. The Violent Earth. (3) Volcanoes, earthquakes, hurricanes, tornadoes, floods and other catastrophic natural phenomena with emphasis on causes, effects and human adjustments. (On demand)
GEOL 3000. Selected Topics in Geology. (1-4) Prerequisite: GEOL 1200-1200L, or permission of the instructor. Treatment of specific topics selected from one of the fields of geology. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (On demand)
GEOL 3110. Minerals and Rocks. (3) Prerequisites or corequisites: GEOL 1200 and 1200L. Formation processes, composition and identification of rocks and minerals in the earth’s crust with important abundance or special use. (On demand)
GEOL 3115. Mineralogy. (4) Prerequisite: GEOL 1200-1200L. Prerequisite or corequisite: CHEM 1251-1251L or permission of the instructor. Identification, classification and description of minerals based on physical properties, crystallography, and chemical composition. Includes diagnostic techniques for identification of common ore and rock forming minerals. Three hours of lecture and one three-hour lab per week. (Spring)
GEOL 3120. Geochemistry. (3) Prerequisites: GEOL 1200-1200L and Chemistry 1251-1251L, or permission of instructor. Geochemical survey of origin, evolution and present composition of the earth. (Alternate years)
GEOL 3120L. Geochemistry Laboratory. (1) Prerequisite or corequisite: GEOL 3120 or permission of instructor. Analytical methods and sample preparation techniques used by geochemists. One three hour meeting per week. (On demand)
GEOL 3124. Sedimentology. (4)  Prerequisites: GEOL 1210-1210L, GEOL 3115 or permission of instructor. Examination of sedimentary rock features and compositions as related to origin, dispersion, deposition, diagenesis, classification and general distribution of sedimentary materials. Three hours of lecture and one three-hour lab per week. (Fall)
GEOL 3130. Structural Geology. (4) Prerequisite: GEOL 3115 or permission of the instructor. A systematic examination of the structures and processes of rock deformation. Three lecture hours, one three-hour lab per week. (Fall)
GEOL 3140. Paleontology. (3) Prerequisite: GEOL 1200, 1200L and GEOL 1210, 1210L or permission of the instructor. Nature of fossils, analysis of growth and variation in fossil assemblages, reconstruction of the modes of life of extinct organisms, paleobiogeography, biostratigraphy, and the fossil record of evolutionary pattern and processes. (On demand)
GEOL 3190. Environmental Geology. (3) Prerequisites: GEOL 1200, 1200L. Aspects of geology with direct or indirect impact on society. Topics include slope stability, earthquake hazards, solid waste disposal, flooding, ground water problems, soil loss, sediment pollution, watershed dynamics, water and soil pollution, and radioactive waste disposal. (Spring)
GEOL 3190L. Environmental Geology Laboratory. (1) Prerequisite or corequisite: GEOL 3190. Investigation of the causes, consequences, and mitigation of natural hazards and disasters. One three-hour lab per week. (On demand)
GEOL 4000. Selected Topics in Geology. (1-4) Prerequisites: ESCI 1101-1101L, GEOL 1200- 1200L, or permission of the instructor. In-depth treatment of specific topics selected from one of the fields of geology. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (On demand)
GEOL 4100. Igneous and Metamorphic Petrology. (4) Prerequisite: GEOL 3115. Classification, mineralogy and chemical properties of igneous and metamorphic rocks including the tectonic processes by which they formed. Lab emphasizes hand specimen and petrographic description and interpretation of rocks in thin sections. (Alternate years)
GEOL 4105. Geomorphology. (3) Prerequisites: ESCI 1101-1101L or GEOL 1200-1200L. Surficial processes and landform development as controlled by climate, tectonics, rock characteristics and time with emphasis on plate tectonic, weathering, erosion, mass wasting, surface water, groundwater, glacial, wind and coastal processes and climate change in landscape development. (Fall)
GEOL 4105L. Gemorphology Laboratory. (1) Prerequisite or corequisite: GEOL 4105. Analysis of landforms and the surficial processes responsible for landform development. One lab period of 3 hours per week. (Fall)(On demand)
GEOL 4110. Stratigraphy. (4) Prerequisites: GEOL 1210-1210L and GEOL3124, or permission of instructor. Vertical and horizontal relationships of layered earth materials as a key to understanding basin history, past depositional environments, and their transformation through time. Three lecture hours, three lab hours per week. (Spring)
GEOL 4115. Applied Geophysics. (4) Prerequisites: GEOL 3115, GEOL 3130, and introductory physics or permission of instructor. Instrumental analysis of the earth's physical parameters. Study of human-induced seismic and electrical signals, and natural magnetic and gravitational fields for the purposes of locating faults, ore bodies, ground water, and other earth hazards or resources. Three hours of lecture and one three-hour lab per week. (On demand)
GEOL 4120. Geologic Mapping and Interpretation. (4) Prerequisites: GEOL 3130 and GEOL 4100 or permission of instructor. Field and lab oriented study using principles of mineralogy, petrology and structural geology. Involves collection and resolution of field data, techniques of presenting data, development of geologic maps, and critical reviews of existing literature. Two hours of lecture, four hours of lab/field work per week. (Alternate years)
GEOL 4125. Geologic Summer Field Camp. (6) Prerequisite: junior standing and permission of instructor. Concentrated field investigation of geologic features. Data collection in the field, geologic mapping, report and map preparation and time management. Location of field camp will be specified each time course is offered. (Summer)
GEOL 4130. Optical Mineralogy. (4) Prerequisite: GEOL 3115. Light optics theory, the behavior of plane polarized light in a solid medium. The laboratory emphasizes the use of petrographic microscope oil immersion techniques and identification of the common rock forming minerals. Three hours of lecture and one three-hour lab per week. (On demand)
GEOL 4135. Tectonics. (4) Prerequisite: GEOL 3130 or permission of the instructor. A systematic examination of the evolution and dynamics of the earth from the perspective of plate tectonics theory. Three lecture hours, and one three-hour lab per week. (Alternate years)
GEOL 4140. Coastal Geology. (3) Prerequisites: GEOL 1200 and GEOL 1210 or permission of instructor. Examination of coastal environments, sediments, and wave-related processes in the present and geologic past. Major topics considered include barrier-island and salt-marsh development, sea-level fluctuations, and the relationship between human development and natural hazards. Three hours seminar per week and one mandatory two-day field trip. (Fall, On demand)
GEOL 4145. Fundamentals of Hydrogeology. (4) Prerequisites: GEOL 1200-1200L, MATH 1241, CHEM 1251-1251L, or permission of instructor. Fundamentals of groundwater hydrology. Principles of flow and transport in groundwater aquifers and the vadose zone. Topics include: storage compressibility, capillarity, Darcy’s Law, aquifer parameters, steady and transient flow equations, well hydraulics, geological controls on groundwater flow, and transport of non-reactive chemical species by advection, diffusion and dispersion in porous media, together with applied problems. Three hours of lecture, and three hours of lab per week with occasional field trips. (Fall)
GEOL 4165. Aqueous Geochemistry. (4) Prerequisite: Prerequisites: CHEM 1251-1251L, CHEM 1252- 1252L and GEOL 3115, or permission of instructor. Interaction of rocks, minerals, and gases with water under natural conditions, including an overview of the compositions of natural waters from a variety of environmental and geologic settings emphasizing a rigorous thermodynamic approach to understanding water-rock interactions. Three hours of lecture, and three hours of lab per week. (On demand)
GEOL 4185. Mineralogy, Economics, and the Environment. (3) Prerequisites: GEOL 3115 Mineralogy or permission of instructor. This course will focus on the origin, distribution, and consumption rate of the Earth’s mineral resources. Lectures and assignments are intended to promote understanding of the geologic, engineering, and economic factors that govern mineral exploration and production. Environmental impacts of the mining industry are also discussed. (On demand)
GEOL 4400. Internship in Geology. (3-6) Prerequisite: Permission of the department. Research and/or work experience designed to be a logical extension of a student’s academic program. The student must apply to the department for an internship by submitting a proposal which specifies the type of work/research experience preferred and how the internship will complement his or her academic program. The student can receive three to six hours credit depending on the nature and extent of the internship assignment. (On demand)
GEOL 4410. Applied Soil Science. (4) Prerequisites: GEOL 3115, GEOL 3124, ESCI 4210 or permission of the instructor. Students will read and discuss current literature pertaining to the application of soils to various fields of research such as surficial processes, active tectonics, ecology, stratigraphy, archaeology, and environmental assessment. Topics covered will vary depending on the interests of the students. Students will create and execute a semester-long soils-based field or laboratory research project of their choosing. Three hours seminar, three hours field or lab each week. (Spring)
GEOL 4800. Individual Study in Geology. (1-4) Prerequisites: Permission of the department and credit hours established in advance. Tutorial study or special research problems. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (On demand)
GERM 1201. Elementary German I. (4) For students with limited or no previous experience in German. First course in a two-course sequence to develop competence in culture, speaking and writing, listening and reading comprehension in German. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
GERM 1202. Elementary German II. (4) Prerequisite: GERM 1201 or equivalent. Second course in a two-course sequence to develop competence in culture, speaking and writing, listening and reading comprehension in German. (Fall, Spring, Summer)(Evenings)
GERM 2201. Intermediate German I. (3) Prerequisite: GERM 1202 or equivalent. Review of grammar; reinforcement and expansion of competence in speaking, understanding, reading, and writing, in a cultural context. (Fall, Spring)
GERM 2202. Intermediate German II. (3) Prerequisite: GERM 2201 or permission of the department. Review of grammar, composition, and conversation using film and/or readings on the culture and civilization of German-speaking countries. Students who wish to continue with advanced offerings in German are advised to complete GERM 2202. (Fall, Spring)
GERM 2210. German in the Workplace. (3) Prerequisite: GERM 2201 or permission of the department. Introduction to spoken and written language of the German-speaking business world. Acquisition of and practice with general commercial terminology used in German for such functional business areas as economics, management, marketing, finance, and import-export. (Alternate for GERM 2202) (Spring)
GERM 3030. Studies in German Culture. (3)  Conducted in English. No knowledge of German required. A study of the life and thought of Germanspeaking people both past and present. Course topic will concentrate on a geographical area, a particular cultural institution, or a particular period. May be repeated as topic changes. (Alternate years)
GERM 3050. Studies in German Literature. (3) Conducted in English. No knowledge of German required. May be repeated as topic changes. (Yearly)
GERM 3150. The Holocaust through German Literature and Film. (3)  Prerequisite for German Majors: satisfactory completion of GERM 2202 or equivalent. Conducted in English. No knowledge of German required. Through the lens of German literature and film this course examines the Holocaust and focuses on historical, moral, and aesthetic issues in its representation. (Yearly)
GERM 3160. Survey of German Film. (3) (W, O) Prerequisite: sophomore status and ENGL 1102. Introduction to major movements in German film history. Conducted in English. Lectures, group discussions, viewing of films (in whole and in part), and a variety of writing assignments. For students seeking to apply this course toward requirements for the German major or minor there is a prerequisite of four semesters of German or the equivalent and a corequisite of GERM 4050. (On demand)
GERM 3201. Advanced German Grammar, Composition and Conversation I. (3)  Prerequisite: GERM 2202 or GERM 2210 or permission of the department. For prospective teachers of German and students who want intensive oral and written work in the language, as well as review of grammar. (Yearly)
GERM 3202. Advanced German Grammar, Composition and Conversation II. (3) Prerequisite: GERM 2202 or permission of the department. Review of German grammar. Intensive oral and written work in the language. (Yearly)
GERM 3800. Directed Individual Study. (1-3) Prerequisite: permission of the department; normally open only to German majors and minors. Individual work on a selected area of study. To be arranged with the instructor, generally during the preceding semester, and by special permission only. May be repeated for credit. (On demand)
GERM 4010. Periods in the History of German Literature. (3) (a) Medieval literature, (b) Classicism, (c) Romanticism, (d) Nineteenth Century, (e)
GERM 4020. The Chief Genres in German Literature. (3) (a) Novel, (b) Theater, (c) Lyric poetry, (d) short prose fiction. Prerequisites: two 3000-level courses or permission of the department. An analysis of a major genre and its development within German literary history. Readings, lectures and reports. May be repeated for major credit with change of topic. (Alternate years)
GERM 4050. Special Topics in German. (1-3) Prerequisite: one 3000-level course or permission of the instructor. Treatment of a special group or figure in German literature, specialized topic in German culture or language, or special problems in German conversation. May be repeated for credit with change of topic. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
GERM 4120. Advanced Business German I. (3) Prerequisites: GERM 2210, 3201 and an additional 3000- or 4000-level course (3202 recommended), or permission of the department. Advanced studies in Business German, intensive practice in speaking, listening comprehension, reading, writing, and translation in functional business areas such as economics, management, and marketing. (Fall)
GERM 4121. Advanced Business German II. (3) Prerequisites: GERM 2210, 3201, and an additional 3000- or 4000- level course (3202 recommended), or permission of the department. Advanced studies in Business German, intensive practice in speaking, listening comprehension, reading, writing, and translation in functional business areas such as marketing, finance, and import-export. (Spring)
GERM 4203. Survey of German Literature I. (3) Prerequisites: two 3000-level courses or permission of the department. General introduction to German literature from the Middle Ages to the Classical Period. Book reports and class discussion on collateral readings. (On demand)
GERM 4204. Survey of German Literature II. (3) Prerequisites: two 3000-level courses or permission of the department. German literature since Classicism. Book reports and discussions on collateral readings. (On demand)
GERM 4410. Professional Internship in German. (1- 6) Prerequisites: GERM 3201 and 3202, or equivalent and permission of the department. Faculty-supervised field and/or research experience in a cooperating professional (e.g., business) or community organization. Contents of internship based upon a contractual agreement among the student, department, and business or community organization. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
GERM 4800. Directed Individual Study. (1-3) Prerequisite: permission of the department; normally open only to German majors and minors. Individual work on a selected area study. To be arranged with the instructor, generally during the preceding semester, and by special permission only. May be repeated for credit. (On demand)
GREK 1201. Elementary Ancient Greek I. (4) Beginning survey of elementary Ancient Greek grammar through selected readings. (Alternate years)
GREK 1202. Elementary Ancient Greek II. (4) Prerequisites: GREK 1201 or equivalent. Completion of the survey of elementary Ancient Greek grammar; connected readings in elementary to intermediate Biblical and Attic prose. (Alternate years)
GREK 3800. Directed Individual Reading. (1-3) Prerequisite: permission of instructor. Individual work on an author or genre to be arranged with the instructor. (On demand)
GRNT 2100. Aging and the Lifecourse. (3) Crosslisted as SOCY 2100. An interdisciplinary course that examines the phenomenon of aging and its consequences for society from a variety of perspectives. Students participate in lectures, discussions and service learning projects designed to give them a broad overview of the field of gerontology. Emphasis on the wide variation in the aging process and approaches to meeting the needs of the aging population. (Fall, Spring)
GRNT 2124. Psychology of Adult Development and Aging. (3) Cross-listed as PSYC 2124. Psychological development through adulthood and old age. Emphasis on processes underlying continuity and change in adulthood, including personality and socialization, cognitive development and the psychophysiology of aging. (Spring)
GRNT 3115. Health and the Aging Process. (3) Cross-listed as HLTH 3115 and NURS 3115. Examination of the physiologic processes of aging as a normal life experience. Study of psychological, nutritional and general health issues designed to facilitate high-level wellness. (Fall)
GRNT 3132. Aging and Culture. (3)  Cross-listed as ANTH 3132. Examination of the processes of aging in various cultural contexts, with emphasis on the implications for understanding aging within American society. Application of anthropological theories and methods to the study of aging. (On demand)
GRNT 3267. Sociology of Dying, Death and Bereavement. (3) Cross-listed as SOCY 3267. Social definitions of death, process of dying, facing death across the lifecourse, grief, bereavement, bioethical issues, impacting individuals and society. (Fall, Spring)
GRNT 3600. Senior Seminar and Field Experience in Aging. (3)  Prerequisites: completion of at least 9 hours in gerontology curriculum including GRNT 2100, and two primary electives (selected from GRNT 3115, 2124, 4110, and 4250). Capstone course for the minor in Gerontology designed to help students apply theories, research methods, and specific intervention strategies to substantive issues, and critically examine the organizational structure of aging programs and policies. Two seminar hours and six field placement hours per week. (Spring)
GRNT 3800. Independent Study in Gerontology. (1- 8) Prerequisite: Permission of the instructor and the gerontology undergraduate coordinator. Supervised individual study and/or field-based experience in a topic or area of Gerontology of particular interest to the student. May be repeated for credit but only a total of 3 credits can be counted toward a Gerontology minor. (On demand)
GRNT 4050. Topics in Gerontology. (1-4) Investigation of specific issues in Gerontology, either from the perspective of a single discipline or from a multidisciplinary perspective. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. A total of 3 credits can be counted toward minor. (On demand)
GRNT 4110. Sociology of Aging. (3) Cross-listed as SOCY 4110. Prerequisite: SOCY 1101 or permission of the instructor. Changing characteristics, aspirations and needs of older adults and their impact upon such institutions as the family, work, the economy, politics, education and health care; emphasis on sociological theories of aging, contemporary research, and the analysis of specific aging policies and programs. (Fall)
GRNT 4134. Families and Aging. (3) Cross-listed as SOCY 4134. Prerequisite: SOCY 1101 or permission of instructor. Theories explaining the formation and functioning of American families with emphasis on the impact of the aging of society. Examination of the current demographic trends and expectations of multigenerational families, as well as the future demands and modifications. (Yearly)
GRNT 4150. Older Individual and Society. (3) Crosslisted as SOCY 4150. Study of the social and cultural context on the lives of aging individuals in American society. Will include a focus on expectations, social interactions, and psychological well-being in the context of retirement, caregiving, and health. (Yearly)
GRNT 4250. Aging Programs and Services. (3) Examination of federal, state and local framework of services and programs for the aging. (On demand)
GRNT 4260. Women: Middle Age and Beyond. (3) Cross-listed as HLTH 4260 and WGST 4260. Position of older women in society and the particular problems of and issues for women as they age. (On demand)
GRNT 4270. Intergenerational Relationships & Programs. (3) Exploration of the importance and consequences of intergenerational relationships and the range of programming currently available to encourage interaction between people of different ages. (On demand)
HGHR 2100. Introduction to Holocaust, Genocide and Human Rights Studies: War Peace, Justice and Human Survival. (3) The relationship between individual and local, state, and global values are examined within the context of war, genocide, peace, and justice. Special emphasis is placed upon problems emergent with the introduction of nuclear weapons and the threat of nuclear war. (Yearly)
HGHR 3050. Topics in Holocaust, Genocide and Human Rights Studies. (3) Study of a special topic. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (On demand)
HGHR 3800. Independent Study in Holocaust, Genocide and Human Rights Studies. (3) Study of a special topic under supervision of a faculty member. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (On demand)
HGHR 4050. Topics in Holocaust, Genocide and Human Rights Studies. (3) Study of a special topic. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (On demand)
HIST 1000. Topics in History. (3) Treatment of a historical topic at an introductory level. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (On demand)
HIST 1120. European History to 1660. (3) Political and cultural developments of Western Europe from the fourth century A.D. to the Age of Absolutism. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
HIST 1121. European History Since 1660. (3) European history from the Age of Absolutism to the present. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
HIST 1160. US History I. (3) American history from the earliest times to 1865. (Fall, Spring, Summer)(Evenings)
HIST 1161. US History II. (3) American history from 1865 to the present. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
HIST 2000. Topics in US History. (3) Treatment of a topic in U.S. History. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (Yearly)
HIST 2001. Topics in European History. (3) Treatment of a topic in European History. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (Yearly)
HIST 2002. Topics in Non-Western History. (3) Treatment of a topic in non-Western History. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. Meets non- Western requirement. (Yearly)
HIST 2003. Topics in Comparative or Applied History. (3) Treatment of a topic in comparative or applied history. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (Yearly)
HIST 2100. Introduction to Historical Methods. (3) (W, O) An introduction to the skills needed for historical research and communication. Includes experience with primary and secondary sources, library research, historical evidence, and citation. Special emphasis is placed on the delivery of a coherent, analytical argument in both written and oral formats. Majors only. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
HIST 2101. American Business History. (3) A survey of the origins, methods, and goals of modern business enterprise. Lectures emphasize the social history of the American business community and the relation between public policy and economic growth. Discussion emphasizes current economic problems and policies. (On demand)
HIST 2105. American Slavery and Emancipation. (3) This course surveys the transformation of life and labor for African Americans from the era of North American colonization through the Civil War and Reconstruction. The class will emphasize slavery as a complex system of labor exploitation and racial control, the dynamics of slave communities, slave resistance, emancipation as process, blacks as agents of their own social and economic change, and the broad meanings of slavery and freedom in American life and in world history. Coursework includes reading of primary and secondary texts. (Alternate years)
HIST 2110. Technology and Science in Society I: Before the Industrial Revolution. (3) The worldwide history of science and technology from the Stone Age to the steam engine, with particular emphasis on the Scientific Revolution of the 16th and 17th centuries. Examines the impact of scientific and technological change on society and the ways in which society shaped the development of science and technology. Scientific and technical background is not a prerequisite. (Alternate years)
HIST 2111. Technology and Science in Society II: Since the Industrial Revolution. (3) The history of science and technology in society from the 18th century to the present. Examines the interconnections of science and technology with society, with particular attention to the U.S. Designed for all students, regardless of scientific and technical background. (Alternate years)
HIST 2120. American Military History. (3) A survey of the development and organization of military practice from the colonial period to the present. (Spring)
HIST 2125. Democracy in America: A Historical Perspective. (3) This course considers the history of politics and government in the United States by examining the history of American democracy in theory and practice. To what extent have American politics and government been democratic? What does the history of democracy in America suggest about the future of politics and society in the United States and the world? This course will examine the rise of parties and mass politics, machine politics and reform movements, the history of citizenship and suffrage as relates to race, ethnicity, and gender, the relationship between war and democracy, and the problem of reconciling democratic ideals with existing social and economic hierarchies. (Alternate years)
HIST 2130. Introduction to Historic Preservation. (3) Techniques available in the United States to identify and preserve historically significant structures, buildings, sites, areas and objects. (Alternate years)
HIST 2135. Introduction to Museums & Historic Sites. (3) This course introduces students to the history and functions of museums and historic sites. Through lecture, discussion, and field trips, students will learn about the role of museums and historic sites in American society. (Alternate years)
HIST 2140. Disease and Medicine in History. (3) Development of medical knowledge, trends in the techniques and availability of medical and psychiatric care, impact of disease and medicine, on selected problems in world history. (On demand)
HIST 2150. US Women’s History to 1877. (3) Cross-listed as WGST 2150. A survey of women’s experience in the U. S. from colonization through the civil war and reconstruction. Special emphasis on the evolution of women’s public roles and the impact of class, race, and region in shaping women’s lives. (Alternate years)
HIST 2151. US Women’s History since 1877. (3) Cross-listed as WGST 2251. A survey of women’s experience in the U.S. from reconstruction to the present. Special emphasis on work, family, and feminism, and the impact of class, race, and region in shaping women’s lives. (Alternate years)
HIST 2152. European Women’s/Gender History. (3) Cross-listed as WGST 2252. An exploration of women’s changing roles in European Society and politics, covering topics of religion, work, family, and activism. (Alternate years)
HIST 2155. Southern Women’s History. (3) This course surveys the history of women’s experiences in the American South. Through readings, lectures, and discussion students will learn about the importance of race, class, and gender in shaping southern women’s lives. (Alternate years)
HIST 2160. African-American History, 1400-1860. (3) Cross-listed as AFRS 2160. The course explores the events and circumstances that brought Africans to the Americas and the experience of these peoples during the time that slavery persisted in the South. Emphasis will be upon the economic and cultural systems that created and maintained slavery in the South and constrained freedom in the North and on the responses and struggles of Africans to these systems. (Fall)
HIST 2161. African-American History Since 1860. (3) Cross-listed as AFRS 2161. This course explores the African-American experience from the Civil War to the present. It follows the struggle of freed slaves and free people of color to take advantage of the promise of emancipation and the changing place of African- Americans in their society. (Spring)
HIST 2200. Asian Civilization. (3) An investigation of the philosophical, religious, social, political and economic foundations of the great Asian civilizations. Emphasis will be placed on understanding those traditions that influence Asian societies today and a comparison of those traditions to Western traditions. Meets non-Western requirement. (Fall)
HIST 2201. History of Modern Asia. (3) Cross-listed as INTL 2201. Focus on the rise of modern Asia from the period just prior to the armed intervention of Western European nations. Emphasis will be placed on the impact of imperialism, colonialism, and the rise of Asian nationalism on Asian societies. Meets non-Western requirement. (Spring)
HIST 2206. Colonial Latin America. (3) A survey of major political, economic, and cultural developments from earliest times to 1826. Meets non-Western requirement. (Yearly)
HIST 2207. Modern Latin America. (3) Cross-listed as INTL 2401. A survey of Latin American history from 1826 to the present with emphasis on the economy and society. Special attention to twentiethcentury revolutions and the role of the United States in Latin America. Meets non-Western requirement. (Fall)
HIST 2210. Pre-Colonial Africa. (3) A survey of major political, economic and religious developments in Sub-Saharan Africa from earliest times to the early 19th century. Meets non-Western requirement. (Fall)
HIST 2211. Modern Africa. (3) Cross-listed as INTL 2101. A survey of major developments in 19th and 20th century Sub-Saharan Africa, with emphasis on the European conquest, the colonial period, and the triumph of modern African nationalism. Meets non- Western requirement. (Spring)
HIST 2215. A History of Muslim Societies. (3) This course covers the history of Muslim societies from the 6th century until the present times. It focuses on the following issues: Birth and expansion of Islamic faith; political, cultural, artistic, intellectual and social history of Muslim societies; relationship between the Islamic World and the Christian Europe; impact of imperialism, nationalism and modernization of Muslim societies; and the efforts to reassert Islamic identity in an era of tightening globalization. Meets non-western requirement. (Alternate years)
HIST 2216. The Modern Middle East. (3) Crosslisted as RELS 2216. An introduction to the history of this important and dynamic region. The course focuses on the issues that have defined the Middle East in the recent past and provides students with the historical context needed to understand the region, its peoples, and its conflicts in greater depth. Meets non-Western requirement. (Fall)
HIST 2250. Russian History from Earliest Times to 1801. (3) Development of the Russian people, focusing upon the rise and fall of the Kievan state, the impact of the period of Tartar domination, the rise of Moscovy, and the growth of the Tsarist autocracy before the reign of Alexander I. (Alternate years)
HIST 2251. Russian History from 1801 to 1917. (3) Decline and fall of the Tsarist empire, focusing upon the efforts of the last four rulers to perpetuate the monarchy and upon the factors working against the effort. (Alternate years)
HIST 2252. Russian History from 1917 to the Present. (3) Development of Soviet Russia, focusing upon the October 1917 Revolution, Lenin's years of rule, Stalin's rise to power, the Five Year Plan and the years since World War II. (Alternate years)
HIST 2260. Britain to 1688. (3) British history with emphasis on institutional, cultural, and economic developments. (Alternate years)
HIST 2261. Britain since 1688. (3) Continuation of HIST 2260 with some treatment of the British Empire. (Alternate years)
HIST 2271. Modern France (1750 to the Present). (3) A study of France, from the Enlightenment and the Revolution of 1789, across the revolutions and wars of the 19th and 20th centuries, to the present. (Alternate years)
HIST 2281. Modern Germany. (3) A survey of German history in the 19th and 20th Centuries covering the emergence of a unified Germany, the Wilhelmine Empire, the Weimar Republic, the Third Reich, the two Germanys and reunification. (Alternate years)
HIST 2284. World War II: The European Theater. (3) Major campaigns of World War II with emphasis upon the European theater of operations. (Alternate years)
HIST 2285. World War II: The Pacific Theater. (3) A description and analytical survey of the military campaigns in the Pacific theater of operations. (Alternate years)
HIST 2297. History of North Carolina, 1500 to the Present. (3) An overview of North Carolina's historical development focusing on the social, economic, and political events that have shaped the state (Fall, Spring)
HIST 2400. History Internship. (1-3) Applied historical techniques utilizing modern methodology and experiences in off-campus institutions or on historical sites. Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. (On demand)
HIST 3000. Topics in U.S. History. (3) Treatment of a topic in U.S. History. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (Yearly)
HIST 3001. Topics in European History. (3) Treatment of a topic in European History. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (Yearly)
HIST 3002. Topics in Non-Western History. (3) Treatment of a topic in non-Western History. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. Meets non- Western requirement. (Yearly)
HIST 3003. Topics in Comparative or Applied History. (3) Treatment of a topic in comparative or applied history. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (Yearly)
HIST 3010. History and Culture through Film, Non- Western. (3) An examination of twentieth-century historical themes in cultural context through films and scholarly monographs. May be repeated as topics vary. Meets non-Western requirement. (On demand)
HIST 3011. History and Culture through Film. (3) An examination of twentieth-century historical themes in cultural context through films and scholarly monographs. May be repeated as topics vary. (On demand)
HIST 3101. History of Greece. (3) From the beginning of civilization in Greece to the 1st Century B.C. (Alternate years)
HIST 3102. History of Rome. (3) From the beginning of civilization in Italy to the 5th Century A.D. (Alternate years)
HIST 3106. Medieval Europe. (3) Europe from the decline of the Roman Empire (ca. 300 A.D.) to 1450. Major topics include: the spread of Christianity, the Frankish Monarchy, the Crusades, the revival of towns, the growth of centralized monarchies, and the Black Death and its consequences. (Alternate years)
HIST 3109. Renaissance and Reformation Europe. (3) European history in the era of Renaissance and Reformation, 1400 to 1650, with special attention to art and comparative analysis. (Alternate years)
HIST 3110. The Age of Revolutions in Europe (1789 to 1871). (3) A study of the role of the major revolutions of the nineteenth century in the making of modern politics. (Alternate years)
HIST 3115. Nineteenth Century Europe, 1814-1914. (3) Political developments in European history from the Congress of Vienna: liberalism, socialism, nationalism, imperialism and the diplomacy leading to World War I. (Alternate years)
HIST 3116. Twentieth Century Europe, 1914 to the Present. (3) Cross-listed as INTL 2301. Causes and results of World War I, rise of new governments, collapse of collective security, World War II and the postwar period. (Fall)
HIST 3118. Eastern Europe After 1945. (3) The first half of this course examines the impact of Communism on Eastern Europe, including its effects on daily life, the economy and politics. The second half covers Eastern Europe’s troubled transition after 1989, looking at the difficulties this region has faced while trying to create democratic governments and market economics. (Alternate years)
HIST 3131. History of Sexuality. (3) Cross-listed as WGST 3131. An exploration of the roots of our modern attitudes toward sexuality beginning with ancient Greece and Rome, Judaism, and Christianity. Examination of changing attitudes and practices from the Enlightenment to the Victorians. Discussion of marriage, fertility control, abortion, prostitution, and homosexuality. (Alternate years)
HIST 3140. Irish History. (3) History of Ireland from prehistory to the present. Course examines the roots of Ireland’s present conflicts in the long history of the English-Irish interaction. (Alternate years)
HIST 3141. World War I. (3) World War I from the outbreak of hostilities to the peace settlement. Impact on the combatant nations and subsequent development of the World. (Yearly)
HIST 3147. The Third Reich. (3) The origins of Nazism, the seizure of power, Hitler's domestic and foreign policy, and the collapse in World War II. (Alternate years)
HIST 3148. The Holocaust. (3) Study of the roots, conception, evolution and execution of the Holocaust, and its impact on culture and society. This course uses primary sources and eyewitness accounts to examine the Shoah from the perspectives of the perpetrator, rescuer, and bystander. (Yearly)
HIST 3150. Shakespeare’s England. (3) England during the century surrounding the life of William Shakespeare using literature from the period as a window through which to explore issues of political, religious, economic, and social change. (Alternate years)
HIST 3155. Health and Healing in Africa. (3) This course provides an historical context for some of the major healthcare challenges facing Africa today from malaria and river blindness to Ebola and AIDS. Rather than uncritically accepting the impression of Africa as a ‘land of disease’ the course will trace the history, health and healing from the pre-colonial era through the period of colonial domination, and since political independence. Meets non-Western requirement. (Alternate years)
HIST 3160. History of Modern China. (3) China from 1600 to the present covering the founding of the last imperial dynasty, the arrival of the West, and China's struggle for unity in the twentieth century. Meets non-Western requirement. (Alternate years)
HIST 3162. Revolutionary Movements in Modern China. (3) Examination of popular uprisings in nineteenth-century China and their relationship to China's twentieth-century revolutionary experience. Meets non-Western requirement. (Alternate years)
HIST 3165. History of Modern Japan. (3) Japan from about 1600 to the present covering Japan's intellectual, social and economic transformation from an agricultural society to an industrial power. Meets non-Western requirement. (Alternate years)
HIST 3169. Central Asia from 1800 to the Present. (3) This course surveys the history of Central Asia from the Russian conquest up through the collapse of the Soviet Union and the era of independence. Specific consideration will be given to the former- Soviet Republics of Kazakstan, Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, Kirgizstan, and Turkmenistan, as well as Afghanistan, Mongolia, and Xinjiang in China. Particular themes and topics to be addressed in this course include colonization, revolution, reform, nationalism, Islam, and international relations. Meets non-Western requirement. (Alternate years)
HIST 3174. Resistance and Adaptation: Indian Peoples Under Spanish Rule. (3) A historical survey of the interactions of indigenous peoples of the western hemisphere with Spanish colonial authorities from the conquest era to 1825. The course focuses on the indigenous peoples of Mexico, Peru, Chile, and Argentina. Meets non-Western requirement. (Alternate years)
HIST 3175. Reform, Riots, and Rebellions in Colonial Spanish America, 1692-1825. (3) This course examines the economic, political, and cultural origins of violent conflict in colonial Latin America, culminating with an analysis of the revolutions for independence. Meets non-Western requirement. (Alternate years)
HIST 3176. History of Mexico. (3) A survey of Mexican history from pre-Columbian times to the present. Special emphasis will be given to the Spanish conquest, the colonial economy, the independence period, the revolution, and relations with the United States. Meets non-Western requirement. (Alternate years)
HIST 3177. The Cuban Revolution. (3) An examination of the economic and political forces that led to the Cuban revolution. Significant background material from the 19th and early 20th centuries will be presented in addition to an analysis of the revolution and post-revolutionary events. Meets non- Western requirement. (Alternate years)
HIST 3178. History of Brazil. (3) Cross-listed as AFRS 3278 and LTAM 3278. A study of Brazilian history since 1500, with an emphasis on social and economic history. The course emphasizes slavery and race relations, the emergence of export economics, rural protest movements, the effects of urbanization and industrialization, and the rise and fall of the military dictatorship. Meets non-Western requirement. (On demand). HIST 3179. Authoritarianism in Latin America. (3) Cross-listed as LTAM 3279. A study of authoritarian rule and popular resistance to authoritarianism in one or more selected Latin American countries, including, but not limited to, Argentina, Brazil, and Chile. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. Meets non- Western requirement. (Alternate years)
HIST 3180. Caribbean History. (3) Cross-listed as AFRS 3220 and LTAM 3220. Covering the sweep of history from European/indigenous contact, through the construction of a plantation regime based on African slave labor, and up to the present day, this class explores the spread of colonialism, the dynamics of slavery, and the tumult of abolition and national independence movements. The Caribbean Sea will be examined as a region, emphasizing the ties uniting the islands and the circum-Caribbean coasts. The region’s past – including empire and imperial conflict, racial oppression and interaction, and international contact – and its legacies will be discussed in relation to political economics, race, and contemporary culture. Meets non-Western requirement. (On demand)
HIST 3181. Afro-Latin American History. (3) Crosslisted as AFRS 3270 and LTAM 3270. This course explores the African Diaspora in Latin America ranging from the Caribbean Sea to the Rio de la Plata. From slavery, to fighting for freedom in the Spanish-American Wars of Independence, to forging new notions of citizenship in twentieth century Brazil, African-descended peoples have an important place in Latin America’s historical past. According special attention to regions with concentrated populations of African-descended peoples, this course reveals the vibrant history of Afro-Latin America. Meets non- Western requirement. (On demand). HIST 3190. Slavery, Racism and Colonialism in the African Diaspora. (3) Cross-listed as AFRS 3260 and LTAM 3260. This course is designed to explore how race and racism, slavery, and colonialism served as principal institutions and constructs shaping the experience between Africa and the emerging African Diaspora in the New World. Students will consider how the maintenance of Western social, economic, and political superiority materialized as functions of these three important historical developments. Meets non-Western requirement. (On demand). HIST 3201. Colonial America. (3) This course examines the diverse and dynamic societies of colonial North America, with particular emphasis on Britain’s thirteen mainland colonies. The course begins with Europe’s age of discovery and exploration and ends on the eve of the imperial crisis that led to American independence. Major themes and topics include religious and political ideals of the colonists, labor systems, economic development, and the cultural exchanges between Europeans, Africans, and native Americans. (Fall)
HIST 3202. American Revolution, 1750-1815. (3) The American Revolution was both a military conflict fought over the issue of colonial independence and a catalyst for sweeping political and social change. This course examines the Revolution as a political, social, and military phenomenon, focusing on the transformation of political culture and the experiences of ordinary Americans. (Spring)
HIST 3203. The Antebellum U.S., 1800-1860. (3) Political and social changes accompanying rapid economic transformation between 1800 and 1860. Emphasis on the sectional tensions between North and South. (Alternate years)
HIST 3211. Civil War and Reconstruction, 1860-1877. (3) The American people in war and the postwar adjustment. Emphasis on the political, social and economic conditions of the North and South during the Civil War and Reconstruction period. (Alternate years)
HIST 3212. History of the South to 1865. (3) The South from colonial origins through the Civil War. Emphasis on the political and cultural developments which ultimately led the South to secession and the creation of a distinct Southern nation in the Confederacy. (Yearly)
HIST 3213. History of the South since 1865. (3) Southern history from Reconstruction to the present. Emphasis on race and class relations as the South copes with change. Special attention to the Civil Rights Movement, industrialization and urbanization. (Yearly)
HIST 3215. Southerners. (3)  Prerequisites: ENGL 1101 and 1102. A writing-intensive course that explores the distinctive characteristics of Southerners through study of biographies and autobiographies. The varied backgrounds of Southerners and selected Americans from other regions will be studied. (Alternate years)
HIST 3218. Racial Violence, Colonial Times to Present. (3) Cross-listed as AFRS 3218. This course examines the ways in which African-Americans and Whites used violence both as part of struggles for liberation and freedom as well as repression from the colonial period to the present in the United States. The focus will be on broader processes of social, political, and cultural change and at efforts to build cooperation. (On demand)
HIST 3240. African-Americans and the Legal Process. (3) Cross-listed as AFRS 3240. This course explores the unique role law has played in the African American experience, establishing the status of persons of African descent in America. Students will investigate how the legal history of African Americans has shaped American race relations over the past 400 years by tracing the evolution of race, racism, and racial formations as a function of America’s legal system. (On demand). HIST 3241. United States Social History to 1860. (3)  Ideas, groups and institutions that shaped early America, with emphasis upon the changes in family, religion, community, and class. (Alternate years)
HIST 3242. United States Social History since 1860. (3)  Ideas, groups and institutions that evolved from the Civil War to the present, with emphasis upon the formation of modern-day American society. (Alternate years)
HIST 3252. United States in the 20th Century, 1932-Present. (3) Political, economic, social and intellectual aspects of American democracy from the New Deal to the Great Society. Special emphasis on the New Deal and post-New Deal reform as well as America's role in world affairs. (Spring)
HIST 3256. United States Foreign Relations, 1901 to the Present. (3) American diplomatic history from the administration of Theodore Roosevelt to the present. Special emphasis on the interaction between domestic, economic, political and social changes, and the formulation of American foreign policy. (Alternate years)
HIST 3260. The United States and Latin America. (3) An examination of the complex relationship between the United States and Latin America in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Topics include U.S. territorial and economic expansion, cultural imperialism, and Latin American efforts to safeguard national sovereignty and to achieve economic development. (Alternate years)
HIST 3280. Blacks in Urban America. (3) Crosslisted as AFRS 3280. African-Americans have been part of the urban scene since the colonizing of the Americas. The course will examine the ways in which their presence in cities has both exemplified and contradicted the understanding of both urban development and race relations in America from colonial times to the present. (On demand)
HIST 3281. American Cities. (3) U.S. urban history. The city as a physical place, as a socio-political environment and as a cultural center. Emphasis on the social developments caused by urbanization. (Alternate years)
HIST 3288. History of the American West. (3) Influence of the frontier on the historical development of the U.S. Emphasis on the trans-Mississippi Western United States. (Alternate years)
HIST 3300. World History for Teachers. (3) This seminar style course enables aspiring history teachers to acquire an advanced command of World History and the ability to teach this subject using a variety of innovative teaching techniques. Students will conduct in-depth topics studies, develop concrete implementation models, and assessment methods for middle and high school classroom use. (Fall)
HIST 3310. Teaching History. (3) This interdisciplinary hands-on seminar prepares students for a career in history education. Using historical developments of the 20th Century as a starting point, students acquire practical, discipline-specific didactical skills native to the history profession and develop materials on NCSCS themes at the grade level they anticipate teaching. This seminar is geared toward advanced education students and history students seeking teaching licensure. (Yearly)
HIST 3795. Honors Seminar. (3) (W, O) Prerequisite: Permission of instructor. Honors level examination of a particular topic. The first course in a required three-course sequence for Honors in History. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. Required of Davenport Scholars. Completion of this course with a grade of C or better meets the requirement for a 2100 course in the major. (Fall)
HIST 3797. Honors Methods and Practice. (3) Prerequisite: Permission of instructor. The second course in a required three-course sequence for Honors in History. Prepares students for the research and writing of an honors thesis. Includes meetings with a range of faculty in the department, preparation of an honors thesis prospectus, and training in research methods and practices. (Spring)
HIST 3798. Preliminary Honors Research. (3)  Prerequisite: HIST 3797 and permission of the instructor. Optional course that allows thesis candidates to conduct preliminary research the semester prior to writing their honors thesis (HIST 3799). Requires written evidence of sufficient research progress equivalent to a regular senior thesis. A passing grade in this course meets the requirement for a 4000 level course in the major. Graded on a Pass/Fail basis. (On demand)
HIST 3799. Honors Research and Thesis. (3)  Prerequisites: HIST 3797, and permission of instructor. The preparation and presentation of an acceptable Honors thesis or its equivalent. The final course in a required three-course sequence for Honors in History. Completion of a thesis earning a passing grade meets the requirement for a 4000 level course in the major; a grade of “A” is required to earn honors. (On demand)
HIST 3800. Independent Projects in History. (3) Prerequisite: Permission of instructor. Individual research or readings on an historical topic. May be repeated for credit with permission of the coordinator or instructor. (On demand)
HIST 4000. Problems in American History. (3)  Prerequisite: HIST 2100 and major in History. A colloquium designed around a problem in American history, requiring reading, discussion, reports, and a major paper. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (Fall, Spring) (Evenings)
HIST 4001. Problems in European History. (3)  Prerequisites: HIST 2100 and major in History. A colloquium designed around a problem in European history, requiring reading, discussion, reports, and a major paper. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (Yearly, Summer) (Evenings)
HIST 4002. Problems in Non-Western History. (3)  Prerequisite: HIST 2100 and major in History. A colloquium designed around a problem in non- Western history, requiring reading, discussion, reports, and a major paper. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (Yearly)
HIST 4300. Introduction to Public History. (3)  Prerequisite: major in History. This course will provide an overview of the main subfields in the field of Public History. Students will learn the fundamentals of Museum Studies, Historic Preservation, and other fields at the discretion of the instructor. (Yearly)
HLTH 2101. Healthy Lifestyles. (3) Overview of issues related to personal health, including healthy behaviors, lifestyles, and outcomes. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
HLTH 3000. Topics in Public Health. (1-3) Prerequisite: permission of the instructor. Additional prerequisites and credit hours vary with topics. Special topics for intermediate level undergraduates. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (On demand)
HLTH 3101. Foundations of Public Health. (3) Prerequisite: Pre-Public Health (PRPH) majors or permission of the instructor. Introduction to the field of public health, including its history, content areas, scope, and paradigms of professional practice. (Fall, Spring)
HLTH 3102. Comparative Healthcare Systems. (3) Prerequisite: majors only. Examination of organizations, structures, and relationships in national and international healthcare systems and the associated financial, legal, and policy issues. (Fall)
HLTH 3103. Behavior Change Theories and Practice. (3) Overview of theoretical approaches to health behavior adherence and compliance, including increasing health enhancing behaviors and sustaining healthy behaviors over time. (Fall, Spring)
HLTH 3104. Research and Statistics in Health. (3) Prerequisite: majors only. Corequisite: HLTH 3104L. Examination of the use of research methods and statistics in public health, including issues related to research design, measurement, sampling, and the application and interpretation of statistical methods. (Spring)
HLTH 3104L. Research and Statistics in Health LAB. (1). Prerequisite: majors only. Corequisite: HLTH 3104. Activities designed to complement HLTH 3104. Meets once a week for 1.5 hours. (Spring)
HLTH 3105. Public Health Education and Promotion. (3) Prerequisite: majors only. Overview of principles and strategies for health education in public health practice settings. (Spring)
HLTH 3115. Health and the Aging Process. (3) Crosslisted as GRNT 3115 and NURS 3115. Examination of the physiologic processes of aging as a normal life experience. Study of psychological, nutritional and general health issues designed to facilitate high-level awareness. (Fall)
HLTH 4000. Special Topics in Public Health. (1-3) Prerequisite: permission of the instructor. Additional prerequisites and credit hours vary with topics. Special topics for advanced undergraduates. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (On demand)
HLTH 4090. International Comparative Health Systems: Western Europe. (3) Cross-listed as NURS 4090. A two-week study tour to explore the cultures, social, and health care systems in Western Europe and to compare them with systems in the United States. Participants will visit a variety of health care sites and attend presentations by practitioners and educators. They will have opportunities to interact with people from the host countries and visit a variety of cultural and historic sites. (Summer)
HLTH 4102. Healthcare Administration. (3) Prerequisite: HLTH 3102 and majors only. Overview of basic concepts and issues within the administration, financing, and policy of healthcare systems. (Fall)
HLTH 4103. Environmental Health: A Global Perspective. (3) Introduction to environmental and occupational health issues and their implications for individual and population health.(Fall)
HLTH 4104. Epidemiology. (3) Introduction to basic principles and methods used in epidemiology to detect and control disease in populations. (Fall, Spring)
HLTH 4105. Program Planning and Evaluation. (3) Prerequisite: HLTH 3105. Corequisite: HLTH 4105L. Use of program planning and behavior change models to design and evaluate theory-based public health promotion and education initiatives. (Spring)
HLTH 4105L. Program Planning and Evaluation LAB. (1) Prerequisite: HLTH 3105 and majors only. Corequisite: HLTH 4105. Activities designed to complement HLTH 4105. Meets once a week for 1.5 hours. (Spring)
HLTH 4210. Health Promotion and Risk Reduction. (3) Overview of health promotion and risk reduction techniques, including theories, strategies, and statistics. (On demand)
HLTH 4220. Mental and Emotional Well-being. (3) Examination of mental and emotional health from a wellness perspective. (On demand)
HLTH 4230. Drugs and Society. (3) Examination of use, misuses, and abuse of natural and synthetic chemicals in today's society, including prevalence, risk factors, and prevention strategies. (On demand)
HLTH 4240. Injury Prevention through the Life Span. (3) Introduction to intentional and unintentional injuries, including prevalence, risk factors, and prevention strategies. (On demand)
HLTH 4250. Adolescent Health and Sexuality. (3) Examination of adolescent health sexuality issues in today’s society. (On demand)
HLTH 4260. Women: Middle Age and Beyond. (3) Cross-listed as GRNT 4260 and WGST 4260. Position of older women in society and the particular problems of and issues for women as they age with special attention to health issues. (On demand)
HLTH 4270. Health Consumerism. (3) Examination of individual health consumer issues in the health marketplace. (On demand)
HLTH 4280. Global Health Issues. (3) Introduction to current issues in global health including disparities, root causes, and strategies for resolution. (Fall or Spring)
HLTH 4290. Health Management Information Systems. (3) Overview of the technical, organizational, and management issues confronted by healthcare professionals in the selection, implementation, and management of healthcare information systems. (On demand)
HLTH 4400. Internship. (3)  Prerequisite: Majors only and permission of the instructor. Practical experience in a public health setting that complements students’ academic and professional goals. Arranged with Coordinator. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
HLTH 4600. Capstone. (3)  Prerequisite: Majors only and permission of the instructor. A culminating project or experience encompassing the five areas of public health: health behavior, environmental health, biostatistics, epidemiology, and health administration, that complements students’ academic and professional goals. Arranged with Coordinator. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
HLTH 4800. Independent Study. (1-6) Prerequisites: Permission of the instructor. Directed individual study that may take the form of initiating, designing, and/or conducting an original community-based or research project, or critique and synthesis of existing community or research issues. May be repeated for credit. (On demand)
HLTH 4900. Undergraduate Research. (1-4) Prerequisite: Permission of the instructor. Opportunity for advanced undergraduate students to work on community or research projects conducted by faculty in their field of interest. May be repeated for credit. (On demand)
HONR 1100. Freshman Honors Seminar. (1) Prerequisite: Freshman standing in the University Honors Program. A course designed to introduce university honors students to scholarship, service, and leadership opportunities in the honors program, the university, and larger community. Class activities will include guest speakers, projects, and workshops. Students will create a final portfolio. (Fall)
HONR 1701. War, Peace, Justice and Human Survival. (3) Cross-listed as LBST 2101 Honors Section only. The relationships between individual and local, state, and global values are examined within the context of war, peace and justice. Special emphasis is placed upon problems emergent with the introduction of nuclear weapons and the threat of nuclear war. HONR 1702. Economic Welfare and International Communities. (3)  Cross-listed as LBST 2102 Honors Section only. Study of the impact of economic institutions on international communities. Focus on development theories, multinational institutions, international debt, and Third World response, international poverty and income distribution and the economic impact on international communities of military spending. HONR 2701. Enrichment Seminar. (2) Students attend a variety of events from the visual arts and performing arts as well as special lectures. Through direct contact, this course is intended to introduce students to events, both contemporary and traditional, to which they would not otherwise be exposed. May be repeated for credit as topics and course work may vary. Offered on a Pass/No Credit basis. HONR 2750. Community Service Laboratory. (1) The purpose of this laboratory experience is to investigate and demonstrate how individuals can make a difference in the human condition. Students enrolled attend weekly seminar meetings. Relationships between the volunteer individual and community agencies served are examined within the context of problem-solving strategies and social/political justice. Impact of volunteerism upon human rights is explored. May be repeated for credit as topics and course work may vary. Offered on a Pass/No Credit basis. HONR 3700. University Honors Topics. (3) A small discussion-oriented class taught by faculty members from different disciplines on interdisciplinary topics. May be repeated for credit as topics and course work may vary. (On demand)
HONR 3701. Science, Technology and Human Values. (3) Cross-listed as LBST 2213 Honors section only. A study of historical and contemporary issues in the relationship between science and technology, on the one hand, and ethical, religious and social concerns on the other hand. HONR 3702. Seminar in Cultural Values and Social Issues. (3)  An examination of social and cultural topics using a writing-intensive and interdisciplinary approach. May be repeated for credit as topics and course work may vary. HONR 3750. Washington Experience. (3) A seminar-style, variable topics course, to be taught in Washington, D.C. as a part of the UNC in Washington Program. The course will explore the role of a national capital in the determination of public policy and national culture in a diverse democracy using Washington, D.C. as text. Enrollment limited to students currently participating in the UNC in Washington Program (completion of this course is considered to be in residence). (Fall, Spring, Summer)
HONR 3790. University Honors Thesis. (3) Prerequisites: Six hours of Honors course work and permission of thesis director and University Honors Committee. Honors project directed by faculty member. Students may also present thesis ideas for group discussion and critical feedback. May be repeated for credit. HUMANITIES, TECHNOLOGY, & SCIENCE (HTAS) HTAS 2100. Introduction to Humanities, Technology, and Science. (3) Cross-listed as LBST 2213. An introduction to ways of considering interrelationships among three of the major dimensions of our culture: its science, its technology, and its humanistic orientation. Students taking this course will be deemed to have met the requirements for the “Ethical and Cultural Critique” area of the LBST requirements and will not have to take an additional course to satisfy that area of General Education. (Yearly)
HTAS 3800. Independent Study in Humanities, Technology, and Science. (3) Study of a special topic under supervision of a faculty member. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (On demand)
IBUS 3000. Topics in International Business. (3) Prerequisites: Permission from the Director of Undergraduate International Business Programs. Topics from areas of international business. This course may be repeated for credit as topics vary. (On demand)
IBUS 3400. International Business Internship. (3) Prerequisites: This course is open to junior and senior International Business majors in good standing. It requires permission of the Director of Undergraduate International Business Programs (UIBP). The internship provides a meaningful work experience in a field of International Business. Internship proposals can be initiated by the student or by the Director of UIBP. The internship requires 150 hours of supervised employment. Interested students should consult the UIBP Director to discuss availability of positions. An internship proposal form, available from the UIBP Director, must be completed and approved prior to registration. Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. IBUS 3400 cannot be repeated for credit or taken for credit at the same time or following any other internship for credit. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
INFO 2130. Introduction to Business Computing. (3) Introduction of computer methods to solve business problems. Emphasis on understanding fundamental hardware and software concepts, selecting and using appropriate hardware and software needed for making various business decisions, and developing practical methods for using the computer to solve quantitative business problems. (May not be taken for upper-level credit in business, but may be taken for general University credit.) (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
INFO 2231. Introduction to Business Programming. (3) Cross-listed as ITCS 2231. Pre/corequisite: INFO 2130 or permission of the department. This course focuses on the examination of business problems, the extraction of the logic and business rules, and the relationship between business logic, programming constructs and technologies for decision support. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
INFO 3000. Topics in Management Information Systems. (3) Prerequisite: INFO 3233 with a C or better. Topics from the area of Management Information Systems. May be repeated for credit. (On demand)
INFO 3130. Management Information Systems. (3) Prerequisites: ACCT 2121, 2122; ECON 2101, 2102; MATH 1120; INFO 2130; STAT 1220; and Junior standing. Impact of information systems on management decision-making activities. Principles of the structure and analysis of information flows within an organization. Emphasis on database accumulation and generation, capabilities of information processing, system function (e.g., file creation, report generation, etc.) and evaluation and modification of information systems. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
INFO 3200. Foundations in Business Computing. (3) Introduction to computer systems in business with emphasis on the capabilities of computer systems (hardware & software) and skills needed to effectively use computerized decision tools for typical business problems. (Cannot be taken for credit toward any undergraduate degree within the Belk College of Business.) (On demand)
INFO 3211. Technical Support. (3) A study of technical support and help desk concepts. Emphasis on building skill sets in diagnosing and solving user and software related problems. Topics include support management techniques, help desk operations, and support performance evaluation. (On demand)
INFO 3229. Business Data Communications. (3) Prerequisites: INFO 3231 with a C or better. A study of the current and potential impact of computer data communications technologies on business operations and productivity. Topics include identifying the need for and designing, planning and implementing of system solutions in such areas as text preparation and dissemination, document storage and retrieval, data communication technologies, telecommuting and teleconferencing, data communication networks, messaging and scheduling. (Fall, Spring)
INFO 3231. Business Applications Development. (3) Prerequisites: ACCT 2121, 2122; ECON 2101, 2102; INFO 2130; INFO/ITCS 2231 with a C or better; MATH 1120; STAT 1220; and junior standing or permission of the department. A study in the development of business applications software. Course emphasizes graphical user interface development using object-oriented, event-driven programming methods and techniques with a highlevel development tool such as Visual Basic or Java. (Fall, Spring)
INFO 3232. International Information Systems Management. (3) Prerequisite: ITCS/INFO 2231 with a C or better and junior standing or permission of department. Study of issues and challenges relating to International Information Systems. Topics include: planning and strategic implications of using global information systems and technology; management of global information flows; and, the problems of integrating technology, systems, and people across the globe. (On demand)
INFO 3233. Business Database Systems. (3) Pre- or corequisite: INFO 3231 with a C or better, or permission of the department. A study of the effective management and utilization of organizational data resources in order to design and implement database management systems (DBMS) for business applications. Exploration of basic concepts of database systems and use of the computer to build and manipulate corporate databases. (Fall, Spring)
INFO 3234. Business Information Systems Development. (3) Prerequisites: INFO 3231 and INFO 3233 with a C or better, or permission of the department. Examination of the systems development process from the perspective of the systems analyst to provide an understanding of concepts, processes and techniques as they are applied to the systems development life cycle. Emphasis on the use of structured and object-oriented techniques to manage the complexities involved in the analysis phase of systems development. (On demand)
INFO 3235. Advanced Business Information Systems Development. (3) Prerequisites: INFO 3234 with a C or better. Development of Business Information Systems. Emphasis on the development of computer applications as products of the systems development life cycle including the design and implementation phases of systems development, as accomplished through a major class project. (Fall, Spring)
INFO 3236. Business Decision Support Systems. (3) Prerequisites: INFO 3231, INFO 3233, and OPER 3100 or permission of the department. A study of the application of the computer to middle and upper-level management processes to provide computer skills needed to implement such applications. Reading, discussion, and hands-on computer projects. (On demand)
INFO 3238. Current Issues in The Management of Information Systems. (3) Prerequisites: INFO 3l30, MGMT 3140 or permission of the department. Information systems and the management of information in an organization to provide exposure to the decision challenges presented to the corporate manager by the rapid development of information technology and to suggest useful constructs for dealing with them. An integrated, interactive approach to decision making. (On demand)
INFO 3240. Fundamentals of eBusiness. (3) Prerequisite or corequisite: INFO 3234 or permission of the department. A study of the evolving information technologies facilitating electronic business (eBusiness) and the business practices and strategies used to compete in the new wired global marketplace. Topics include the infrastructure for eBusiness, new business strategies and models, web design, and management strategies, and an exploration of a variety of technologies involved in eBusiness. (Fall, Spring)
INFO 3241. Audit, Control, and Security of Business Information Systems. (3) Prerequisites: INFO 3130 with a C or better and ACCT 3340 OR corequisites INFO 3233 and INFO 3229 OR permission of the department. This course examines the role of information systems in supporting risk management objectives of organizations. Auditing of information systems, control objectives or information systems, and related concepts involving security and privacy will be examined. (On demand)
INFO 3500. Cooperative Education and 49ership Experience. (0) Enrollment in this course is required for the department's cooperative education and 49ership students during any semester they are working in a position.. Acceptance into the Experiential Learning Program by the University Career Center is required. Participating students pay a course registration fee for transcript notation (49ership and co-op) and receive full-time student status (co-op only). Assignments must be arranged and approved in advance. Course may be repeated; evaluation is Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory. Only open to undergraduate students; Graduate level students are encouraged to contact their academic departments to inquire about academic or industrial internship options for credit. For more information, contact the University Career Center. (Spring, Summer, Fall)
INFO 3800. Directed Study. (1-6) Prerequisites: Permission of the department and junior standing. Enrollment granted only by permission of the faculty with whom the work will be performed. The student's work assignments will be designed by the student and faculty member who will oversee the project of study. The credit hours will be determined prior to enrollment and will be based on the particular project undertaken. (On demand)
INTL 1101. Introduction to International Studies. (3) An introductory, interdisciplinary survey of the field of international studies. Attention will focus on the economic, geo-political and socio-cultural issues affecting relationships in an increasingly interdependent global system. (Fall, Spring)
INTL 2101. Introduction to African Studies. (3) Cross-listed as HIST 2211/AFRS 2221. A survey of major developments in 19th and 20th century Sub- Saharan Africa, with emphasis on the European conquest, the colonial period, and the triumph of modern African nationalism. (Fall)
INTL 2201. Introduction to Asian Studies. (3) Crosslisted as HIST 2201. Focus on the rise of modern Asia from the period just prior to the armed intervention of Western European nations. Emphasis will be placed on the impact of imperialism, colonialism, and the rise of Asian nationalism on Asian societies. (Spring)
INTL 2301. Introduction to European Studies. (3) Cross-listed as HIST 3116. Causes and results of World War I, rise of new governments, collapse of collective security, World War II and the post-war period. (Fall)
INTL 2401. Introduction to Latin American Studies. (3) Cross-listed as HIST 2207. A survey of Latin American history from 1826 to the present with emphasis on the economy and society. Special attention to twentieth-century revolutions and the role of the United States in Latin America. (Spring)
INTL 3000. Topics in International Studies. (1-3) Analysis of a selected topic related to international studies. The particular topic of the course may vary from semester to semester. A student may repeat the course for credit as topics vary. (On demand)
INTL 3111. Politics and Culture in Literature. (3)  An exploration of different types of political systems across the world and the ways in which the cultures and values of those systems are reflected in literature. The relationship between politics and literature will be examined with particular reference to such topics as human rights, gender roles and war. The political systems selected for consideration will be representative of different geographic regions and philosophies. (Yearly)
INTL 3112. Globalization and Culture. (3) Crosslisted as ANTH 3112. This course explores the relationship between processes of globalization and cultural change. It will consider the breakdown of the connection between lived cultural experience and territorial location. Of special interest will be issues of cultural homogenization, cultural hybridization and emergent cultural identities brought about by the flows of people, ideas and objects in the contemporary world. (Yearly)
INTL 3115. Globalization and Digital Media. (3) Cross-listed as COMM 3126. An analysis of the role and impact of digital media on globalization. The course considers how the internet and social networks have changed our connection from a physical global society to a virtual culture and explores the ways in which digital communication has fostered the globalization of artistic styles, cultural forms, political relationships and economic transactions. (Yearly)
INTL 3120. Women’s Studies International. (3) Cross-listed as WGST 4120. This course will explore policies affecting women’s lives across international borders and will look at a range of topics from divorce, marriage, violence against women and abortion to work and poverty. (Fall)
INTL 3131. Diplomacy in a Changing World. (3) Cross-listed as POLS 3159. Diplomacy, a means to resolve disputes between sovereign states short of war, will be analyzed through case studies drawn from historical context and through a survey of contemporary crises. The American diplomatic process will also be reviewed with particular attention to how policy is shaped, how an embassy functions and how Americans train for the professional diplomatic service. (Yearly)
INTL 3135. Origins of Globalization. (3) An analysis of European colonial expansion from the 16th through the 19th century, emphasizing the creation of the first global systems of political, economic, and cultural interaction that form the foundation of modern globalization. Using a cross-cultural approach, the course explores the competition and conflict among the great powers and the effects of conquest and colonialism on the indigenous peoples of Africa, Asia and the Americas. (Yearly)
INTL 3136. Globalization and Resistance. (3) A cross-cultural analysis of changing patterns of resistance by indigenous peoples to the political, cultural and economic effects of globalization from the colonial period to the present. Using case studies from the Americas, Africa and Asia, the course examines a variety of indigenous resistance strategies and movements and the socio-political dynamics that have driven them and impacted on their effectiveness. INTL 3151. International Political Economy. (3) Cross-listed as POLS 3151. An analysis of the political dynamics of economic relationships among countries. Attention is focused on the political aspects of monetary, trade and investment relationships, and the difficulties involved in coordinating policy and maintaining effective international management. (Yearly)
INTL 3400. International Studies Internship. (1-3) Prerequisite: Permission of the director. Practical experience and/or training related to the field of international studies. A minimum of 45 hours per credit. (Fall, Spring)
INTL 3800. Independent Study. (1-3) Prerequisite: Permission of the director. Supervised investigation of an issue related to the field of international studies that is of special interest to the student and that is not covered in existing or available courses. (Fall, Spring)
INTL 4601. International Studies Seminar. (3) (W, O) Prerequisite: advanced junior or senior class status. A capstone seminar involving in-depth research and analysis of topics of common interest to all majors, yet specific to each student's area studies concentration. (Fall, Spring)
ITCS 1101. Introduction to Computer Concepts. (3) Prerequisite or corequisite: MATH 1100 OR MATH 1101 OR MATH 1103 OR MATH 1120 OR MATH 1241. Introductory course that gives an overview of computer hardware and software. Primary emphasis is on productivity software (word processing, spreadsheet, and graphical presentation). These applications are taught through a series of projects/assignments. Aspects of Internet research are also covered. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Internet)
ITCS 1102. Advanced Internet Concepts. (3) Crosslisted as ITIS 1102. Prerequisite: ITCS 1101 or permission of the department. This course is an advanced study of the Internet environment. This course is designed for any student who is familiar with office productivity tools and a user of Internet technologies; it addresses advanced concepts of computer literacy. Topics include: concepts of website design and how to evaluate websites; proper use of synchronous and asynchronous communication tools (e.g., chat, email, IM); issues of copyright and cyber-ethics; using the Internet to do research; and publishing via the Internet. Other topics may be added to keep the content current and relevant. Students will complete extensive Internet oriented projects to demonstrate mastery of the skills discussed in class. (May not be taken for credit by ITIS majors.) (Fall, Spring, Summer)(Internet)
ITCS 1200. Freshman Seminar (3) Cross-listed as ITIS 1200. Prerequisite: permission of department. An introductory Information Technology course designed to assist students with the transition to college by acquainting them with the University’s resources and support, exploring opportunities in the IT field, and developing a strong sense of community within the College of Computing & Informatics and the University as a whole. The development of learning skills, time management skills, and other life skills necessary for college success will be emphasized. (Fall)
ITCS 1203. Survey of Computing. (3) Cross-listed as ITIS 1203. Introductory course that explores the broad field of computing as it applies to daily life. Topics cover computers of all sizes from handheld devices to super computers; the role of software from operating systems to applications; the software development process; issues of security and privacy on the Internet and the World Wide Web; and possible fields of study within the broad field of information technology. (Fall, Spring)
ITCS 1212. Introduction to Computer Science. (3) Corequisite: ITCS 1212L; Prerequisites or corequisites: MATH 1100 or MATH 1103 or MATH 1120 or MATH 1241. Introduction to algorithmic problem solving strategies and algorithm development; basic concepts and terminology of computers; study of data representation and number systems; use of computers to implement numerical and symbolic algorithms. General programming concepts will be taught through the use of a high level language. The course grade includes the student’s performance in ITCS 1212L. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ITCS 1212L. Programming Lab I. (0) Corequisite: ITCS 1212. Guided laboratory exercises dealing with programming mechanics; algorithm development; and the use of computers in problem solving. One laboratory period of three hours per week. Performance in ITCS 1212L will be counted as portion of the ITCS 1212 grade. Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
ITCS 1215. Introduction to Computer Science II. (3) Prerequisite: ITCS 1212 with a grade of C or better, or permission of the department. An advanced study of programming based on object oriented concepts. Extends the fundamentals studied in ITCS 1212. Includes a study of software design tools and advanced programming constructs, such as UML diagrams, decision tables, recursion, and dynamic storage allocation. Concepts are taught be means of an in-depth study of an object oriented language. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings) (Internet)
ITCS 1301. Introduction to the Financial Services Industry. (3) Cross-listed as ITIS 1301. The objective of this course is to provide the student with an overview of the financial services industry, to include such areas as the industry components; regulatory considerations and their impact; and relations with other institutions. (Fall, Summer)
ITCS 2050. Topics in Computer Science. (1-3) Prerequisite: Permission of the department. Topics in computer science selected to supplement the regular course offerings at the 2000 level. (May be repeated for credit with the permission of the department. A student may register for multiple sections of the course with different topics in the same semester or in different semesters.) (On demand)
ITCS 2116. C Programming. (3) Prerequisite: Knowledge of any other computer programming language or permission of the department. A study of the programming language C. Data types, operators, functions, program structure, file I/O, storage classes, exceptions, concurrent programming, and the preprocessor. (Summer) (Evenings)
ITCS 2163. Introduction to File Processing. (3) Prerequisite: ITCS 1215. Concepts and techniques of structuring data on external storage devices; provides the foundation for applications of data structures and file processing techniques. (On demand)
ITCS 2175. Logic and Algorithms. (3) Prerequisites: ITCS 1212 and (MATH 1120 or MATH 1241). Introduction to propositional calculus, predicate calculus, algorithms, logic functions, finitestate machines; logic design. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ITCS 2181. Computer Logic and Design. (3) Prerequisite: ITCS 1212 or permission of the department. Logic design; logic circuits; state diagrams; Karnaugh maps; memories; tri-state devices; bus structures; and data control concepts. (On demand)
ITCS 2214. Data Structures. (3) Prerequisite: ITCS 1215 with a grade of C or better, or permission of the department. A study of the theory and implementation of abstract data types (ADTs)
ITCS 2215. Design and Analysis of Algorithms. (3) Prerequisites: (MATH 1120 or 1241) and (ITCS 2175 or MATH 1165) and ITCS 2214. Introduction to the design and analysis of algorithms. Design techniques: divide-and-conquer, greedy approach, dynamic programming. Algorithm analysis: asymptotic notation, recurrence relation, time space complexity and tradeoffs. Study of sorting, searching, hashing, and graph algorithms. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings) (Internet)
ITCS 2231. Introduction to Business Programming. (3) Cross-listed as INFO 2231. Pre/corequisite: INFO 2130 or permission of the department. This course focuses on the examination of business problems, the extraction of the logic and business rules, and the relationship between business logic, programming constructs and technologies for decision support. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Internet)
ITCS 2301. Financial Services Computing Environment. (3) Cross-listed as ITIS 2301. Prerequisite: ITCS/ITIS 1301. The objective is for the student to gain insights on several key components in financial computing environments and the enabling technologies. (Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
ITCS 3050. Topics in Computer Science. (1-3) Prerequisite: Permission of the department. Topics in computer science selected to supplement the regular course offerings at the 3000 level. (May be repeated for credit with the permission of the department. A student may register for multiple sections of the course with different topics in the same semester or in different semesters.) (On demand)
ITCS 3110. Compiler Construction. (3) Prerequisites: ITCS 2215. Review of programming language structures, translation, loading, execution, and storage allocation. Compilation of simple expressions and statements. Organization of a compiler, including compile-time and run-time tables, lexical scan, syntax scan, object code generation, error diagnostics, object code optimization techniques, and overall design. Use of compiler writing languages and boot strapping. (On demand)
ITCS 3112. Design and Implementation of Object- Oriented Systems. (3) Prerequisite: ITCS 2215. Indepth exploration of object-oriented programming and system development. Topics include: evolution of object-oriented methodology; concept of the objectoriented approach; object-oriented programming languages; object-oriented analysis and design; the design of software for reuse; and incremental software development. (Spring) (Evenings)
ITCS 3123. Introduction to Numerical Methods. (3) Prerequisites: ITCS 2214 AND (MATH 1241 or MATH 1120). General concepts of scientific computing and their applications to such areas as non-linear equations, numerical integration, spline and polynomial interpolation, and initial value problems. (On demand)
ITCS 3134. Digital Image Processing. (3) Prerequisites: ITCS 2214, MATH 1242, and MATH 2164, with grades of C or better. Overview of fundamentals of image acquisition, representation, enhancement, segmentation, reconstruction, analysis and recognition. Image generation, viewing and perception; image transformations using the Fourier transform; spatial operations and filtering (spatial and frequency domain); image coding; lossless and lossy compression; boundary and region based segmentation; thresholding and classification; boundary and regional image descriptors; matching and neural networks; shape numbers. (Spring)
ITCS 3143. Operating Systems. (3) Prerequisite: ITCS 2214 or permission of the department. Introduction to multiprogramming operating systems. Process synchronization and management of memory, devices, and files; performance evaluation. (On demand)
ITCS 3146. Operating Systems and Networking. (3) Prerequisite: ITCS 2215 or permission of the department. Introduces the fundamentals of operating systems together with the basics of networking and communications. Topics include: processes, thread, cache, memory management, virtual memory, concurrency, assembly language, network architecture and protocols, web and HTTP, UPD and TCP, internet routing. (Fall, Spring)
ITCS 3152. Symbolic Programming. (3) Prerequisite: ITCS 2214. Basic concepts of symbolic programming including selected topics in artificial intelligence, heuristic searching, symbolic algebra, language parsing, and theorem proving. (Fall) (Evenings)
ITCS 3153. Introduction to Artificial Intelligence. (3) Prerequisite: ITCS 3152 or permission of the department. Basic concepts of artificial intelligence. Topics include: defining the problem as a state space search, production systems; heuristic search; basic problem-solving methods; game playing; knowledge representation using predicate logic, semantic nets, frames, and scripts; non-monotonic reasoning, statistical and probabilistic reasoning. (Spring)
ITCS 3155. Software Engineering. (3) Prerequisite: ITCS 1215 or permission of the department. The system development cycle is examined in detail from the aspects of software engineering. Current tools and techniques of systems design-data dictionary, data flow diagrams, structured walkthroughs, and capacity planning will be taught and presented in conjunction with case studies and class problems. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
ITCS 3160. Data Base Design and Implementation. (3) Prerequisite: ITCS 1215 or permission of the department. Logical and physical database organization, data models, design issues, and secondary storage considerations. Emphasis on actual participation in the design and implementation of databases. (Fall, Spring) (Evenings)
ITCS 3166. Introduction to Computer Networks. (3) Prerequisite: ITCS 1215 or permission of the department. Internet architecture and protocols. Distributed vs. centralized processing. Data communications; speed; capacity; media, protocols. Network architectures. Evaluation of alternatives. Case studies. (On demand)
ITCS 3170. Applied Scientific Computing. (3) Prerequisites: MATH 2164 or its equivalent. Topics include: Concepts of continuous and discrete signals; continuous Fourier transform and its applications in multimedia processing; discrete Fourier transform and its applications in arts and multimedia processing; fundamentals of stochastic systems; fundamentals of ordinary differential equations; applications of differential equations in modeling; wavelet transform and its applications in music and multimedia processing; fundamentals of fractals and their application in arts and science; classification and clustering. (On demand)
ITCS 3181. Logic and Computer Systems. (3) Prerequisites: ITCS 2175 and ITCS 2215. Corequisite: ITCS 3181L. Fundamental layers of digital computer systems: Switch level network structure; digital logic level including ALU, registers, buses; microprogramming level; conventional Instruction Set Architecture level and assembly language; memory organization and architecture; pipelining and functional parallelism. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
ITCS 3181L. Computer Systems Lab and Recitation. (0) Corequisite: ITCS 3181. Guided laboratory exercises and recitation for design of multilevel computer systems: combinational and sequential logic networks; Arithmetic and Logic Unit; pipeline design; microprogramming and assembly language practice; computer simulation practice. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ITCS 3182. Computer Organization and Architecture. (3) Prerequisite: ITCS 2181 or ECGR 2181. Machine level representation of data; von Neumann architecture; instruction sets and types; addressing types; assembly and machine language programming; control unit and microprogramming; alternate architectures. (On demand)
ITCS 3183. Hardware System Design. (3) Prerequisite: ITCS 3181 or 3182 or permission of the department. Design of hardwired control systems; processors and memory systems; application specific design; use of simulation tools. Laboratory intensive course. (Spring) (Even years)
ITCS 3216. Introduction to Cognitive Science. (3) Cross-listed as PSYC 3216. Prerequisite: Permission of the department. Interdisciplinary introduction to the science of the mind. Broad coverage of such topics as philosophy of mind, human memory processes, reasoning and problem solving, artificial intelligence, language processing (human and machine), neural structures and processes, and vision. (Spring, Odd years)
ITCS 3301. Introduction to the Regulatory Environment for Financial Services Firms. (3) Crosslisted as ITIS 3301. Prerequisite: ITCS/ITIS 2301. Using case studies, enable the student to understand the compliance and regulatory environment that currently exists for Financial Services firms. (Fall, Summer) (Evenings)
ITCS 3590. Computer Science Cooperative Education and 49ership Experience. (0) This course is required of Co-op and 49ership students during the semester they are working. Acceptance into the Experiential Learning Program is required. Participating students pay a course registration fee for transcript notation. Assignments must be arranged and approved in advance. Course may be repeated. Evaluation is Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory. Only open to undergraduate students; Graduate level students are encouraged to contact their academic departments to inquire about academic or industrial internship options for credit. For more information, contact the University Career Center. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ITCS 3688. Computers and Their Impact on Society. (3) (O, W) Prerequisite: Junior standing and permission of the department. A study of current topics (software piracy, hacking, professional conduct)
ITCS 3690. Seminar. (1-6) Prerequisite: Permission of the department. May be repeated for credit. (On demand)
ITCS 3691. Seminar. (1-6) Prerequisite: Permission of the department. A continuation of ITCS 3690. May be repeated for credit. (On demand)
ITCS 3695. Computer Science Cooperative Education Seminar. (1) Required of Co-op students immediately following each work assignment for presentation of reports on work done the prior semester. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ITCS 3699. Senior Seminar. (1-3) Prerequisites: Senior standing and permission of the department. Each participant will prepare a lecture on a topic in computer science. Emphasis will be on communication of technical information as well as on content of the presentations. May be repeated for credit. (On demand)
ITCS 4010. Topics in Computer Science. (1-3) Prerequisite: Permission of the department. Topics in computer science selected to supplement the regular course offerings at the 4000 level. (May be repeated for credit with the permission of the department. A student may register for multiple sections of the course with different topics in the same semester or in different semesters.) (On demand)
ITCS 4102. Programming Languages. (3) Prerequisite: ITCS 2215. Formal definition of programming languages, including specification of syntax and semantics. Evolution of programming languages and language design principles. Structural organization, control structures, data structures and types, name visibility, binding times, parameter passing modes, subroutines, coroutines, and tasks. Functional programming, list processing, logic programming, object-oriented programming systems. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
ITCS 4107. Formal Languages and Automata. (3) Prerequisite: MATH 1165 or ITCS 2175. Detailed study of abstract models for the syntax of programming languages and information processing devices. Languages and their representation; grammars, finite automata and regular sets; contextfree grammars and pushdown automata; Chomsky Hierarchy; closure properties of families of languages; syntax analysis. (On demand)
ITCS 4120. Introduction to Computer Graphics. (3) Prerequisites: ITCS 2214 and MATH 2164 or permission of department. Graphics hardware; raster algorithms; geometric transformations; 2D/3D interactive graphics; 3D viewing and perspective projections; color and lighting models; hidden surface removal; modeling hierarchies; fractals; curved surfaces. (Fall) (Evenings)
ITCS 4121. Information Visualization. (3) Prerequisites: ITCS 1215 or approval of the instructor. Information visualization concepts, theories, design principles, popular techniques, evaluation methods, and information visualization applications. (Spring) (Evenings)
ITCS 4122. Visual Analytics. (3) Prerequisite: any of STAT 1220, 1221, 1222, 2122, or 2223, or approval of the instructor. This course introduces the new field of visual analytics, which provides tools for the interactive visual analysis of large and complex data sets in many application areas. Topics include: visual representation, perception, the analysis process, critical thinking, data transformations, color, interaction, and applications. (Fall) (Evenings)
ITCS 4123. Visualization and Visual Communication. (3) Understanding the relatively technical field of visualization from the point of view of visual communication; this course draws connections with photography, design, illustration, aesthetics, and art. Both technical and theoretical aspects of the various fields are covered, and the connections between them are investigated. (Spring)
ITCS 4128. Programming Languages and Compilers. (3) Prerequisite: ITCS 2214. Introduction to the concepts and techniques used in describing, defining, and implementing programming languages and their compilers. Introduction to parsing and parser construction; LL and LR grammars; syntax directed translation; data object representations; run time structures; intermediate languages; code optimization. (On demand)
ITCS 4131. Simulation. (3) Prerequisites: MATH 3122 or permission of department. Emphasis on the design and derivation of mathematical models of dynamic systems; deterministic simulation; random events; non-deterministic simulation; discrete simulation; comparison and optimization. (On demand)
ITCS 4133. Numerical Computation Methods and Analysis. (3) Prerequisites: ITCS 2214 and either MATH 1120 or MATH 1241. Introduction to principles and techniques behind numerical methods and algorithms that underlie modern scientific and engineering applications. Roots of equations: linear systems (direct methods, LU/QR factorization, iterative methods); Eigen values and vectors; Interpolation, Approximation; Numerical Differentiation/Integration, ODEs and PDEs. (On demand)
ITCS 4141. Computer Organization and Architecture. (3) Prerequisite: ITCS 3181, 3182 or equivalent. Fundamentals of computer design; instruction set design, basic processor implementation techniques; pipelining; memory hierarchy; Input/Output. Cost/performance and hardware/software trade-offs. (Fall, Alternate years)
ITCS 4145. Parallel Computing. (3) Prerequisites: ITCS 2214 and ITCS 3181 or 3182. Types of parallel computers, programming techniques for multiprocessor and multicomputer systems, parallel strategies, algorithms, and languages. (Once every three semesters) (Evenings)
ITCS 4146. Grid Computing. (3) Prerequisite: ITCS 1215. Grid computing software components, standards, web services, security mechanisms, schedulers and resource brokers, workflow editors, grid portals, grid computing applications. (Once every three semesters)
ITCS 4151. Intelligent Robotics. (3) Prerequisites: ITCS 2214 and MATH 2164. General introduction to spatial descriptions and transformations, and manipulator position and motion. More study on robot planning, programming, sensing, vision, and CAD/CAM. (On demand)
ITCS 4152. Computer Vision. (3) Prerequisites: ITCS 2215 and MATH 2164. General introduction to computer vision and its application. Topics include low level vision, 2D and 3D segmentation, 2D description, 2D recognition, 3D description and model-based recognition, and interpretation. (Fall)
ITCS 4155. Software Development Projects. (3) Prerequisites: ITCS 2215; one of ITCS 3155, ITIS 3300, ITIS 3310, or permission of the instructor; and Senior Standing or permission of the department. In this course, students will learn advanced software engineering concepts. The course will explore the entire software development process, emphasizing requirements engineering, design, implementation, test, deployment, and evolution. In addition, students will be introduced to advanced topics in software engineering, such as object-oriented modeling, software architecture, architectural styles, design patterns, middleware frameworks, and programming paradigms. Students will apply these concepts, along with concepts from introductory programming courses, data structures and algorithms courses, and introductory software engineering courses, to a team software development project that will result in an executable software system prototype. (Spring)
ITCS 4157. Computer-Aided Instruction. (3) Prerequisite: Permission of the department. History of CAI; study of current CAI systems; development of man-machine dialogue; programming tools for CAI; information structures for computer-oriented learning. Advantages/disadvantages/costs of CAI. (On demand)
ITCS 4161. Intellectual Property Aspects of Computing. (3) Prerequisite: Senior standing or permission of the department. This course explores the broad field of intellectual property and the many aspects related to computing. Topics covered include software copyrights, software patents, trademarks and service marks, employment contracts, non-compete agreements, software licenses, software development contracts, preservation of digital evidence, protection of trade secrets, cyberspace law and the use of mediation in IP disputes. (Spring)
ITCS 4181. Microcomputer Interfacing. (3) Prerequisite: ITCS 3181, ITCS 3182, ECGR 3181, or permission of the department. Signal conditioning, A/D conversion, noise, transmission line effects, signal processing, D/A conversion and serial/parallel interfaces. (Fall) (Even years) (Evenings)
ITCS 4230. Introduction to Game Design and Development. (3) Prerequisite: ITCS 2215. Basic concepts and techniques for electronic game design and development. Topics include: game history and genres, game design teams and processes, what makes a game fun, level and model design, game scripting and programming including computer graphics and animation, artificial intelligence, industry issues, and gender and games. (Fall)
ITCS 4231. Advanced Game Design and Development. (3) Prerequisite: ITCS 4230. Advanced concepts and techniques for electronic game design and development. This course is a project-centered course where students explore complex gameplay and interactivity. The course explores topics from the introductory course in more depth, such as: applying software engineering techniques to developing games, advanced game programming and scripting, networking, graphics, physics, audio, game data structures and algorithms, and artificial intelligence. (Spring)
ITCS 4232. Game Design and Development Studio. (3) Prerequisite: ITCS 3155, ITCS 4120, ITCS 4231, and one approved game elective, or permission of instructor; and senior standing or permission of the department. Application of advanced concepts and techniques for electronic game design and development. Teams will use engineering techniques to incorporate game programming and scripting, networking, graphics, physics, audio, game data structures and algorithms, and artificial intelligence into an electronic game. Individuals will develop a complete portfolio of prior work and the class project. (Spring) (Odd years) (Evenings)
ITCS 4235. Game Engine Construction. (3) Prerequisite: ITCS 4120 or permission of department. Introduction to principles and techniques behind modern computer and console game engines. Graphics Rendering Pipeline (transformations, lighting, shading); 2D/3D Texture Mapping; Image Based Rendering; Spatial Structures and Acceleration Algorithms; Level of Detail; Collision Detection, Culling and Intersection Methods; Vertex/Pixel Shaders; Pipeline Optimization; Rendering Hardware. (Spring) (Odd years) (Evenings)
ITCS 4236. Artificial Intelligence for Computer Games. (3) Prerequisite: ITCS 3153. Application of advanced concepts and techniques in artificial intelligence for electronic game design and development. An investigation of the artificial intelligence techniques necessary for an agent to act, or appear to act, intelligently in interactive virtual worlds. Topics include uncertainty reasoning, machine learning, perception, knowledge representation, search, and planning. Emphasis will be on implementation and experimentation with the goal of building robust intelligent agents in interactive entertainment domains. Elements of multi-agent collaboration and the use of cognitive architectures in interactive computer games will also be discussed. (On demand)
ITCS 4237. Audio Processing for Entertainment Computing. (3) Prerequisite: MATH 1242, MATH 2164, and ITCS 2215 or equivalents. Introduction to the principles and applications of audio (digital signal) processing focusing on entertainment domains. Topics include: analysis of signals, transforms, digital filter design techniques, audio engine development, file encoding/decoding, spatial sound rendering, optimization, and advanced audio techniques. (On demand)
ITCS 4640. Financial Services Informatics Industry Foundations Capstone I. (3) Cross-listed as ITIS 4640. Prerequisite: Senior standing. An individual or group project in the theory, teaching, or application of Financial Services Informatics under the direction of a faculty member. Projects must be approved before they may be initiated. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ITCS 4641. Financial Services Informatics Industry Foundations Capstone II. (3) Cross-listed as ITIS 4641. Prerequisite: ITCS/ITIS 4640. A continuation of ITCS/ITIS 4640. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
ITCS 4650. Senior Project. (3) Prerequisites: senior standing and two ITCS/ITIS 3xxx/4xxx courses with a grade of C or better, or permission of the department. An individual or group project in the teaching, theory, or application of computer science under the direction of a faculty member. Projects must be approved by the department before they can be initiated. (Fall, Spring) (Evenings)
ITCS 4651. Senior Project. (3) Prerequisite: ITCS 4650. A continuation of ITCS 4650. (Fall, Spring, Evenings)
ITCS 4681. Senior Design I. (3) Prerequisites: senior standing and two ITCS/ITIS 3xxx/4xxx courses with a grade of C or better, or permission of the department. An individual or group computer engineering design project under the direction of a faculty member. Projects must be approved by the department before they can be initiated. (Fall, Spring) (Evenings)
ITCS 4682. Senior Design II. (3) Prerequisite: ITCS 4681. A continuation of ITCS 4681. (Fall, Spring) (Evenings)
ITCS 4990. Undergraduate Research. (3) Prerequisite: Permission of the department. This course consists of undergraduate research as part of a joint undergraduate/graduate research project using existing research laboratory facilities and materials. Course may be repeated in subsequent terms for a maximum of 6 hours total. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ITCS 4991. Undergraduate Thesis. (3) Prerequisites: ITCS 4155, 4232, 4650, 4681, or 4990, and permission of the department. A thesis student will explore a subject in computer science chosen for thesis research and present a written thesis to the student’s thesis committee consisting of the thesis advisor and at least two other faculty members. (Fall, Spring)
ITIS 1102. Advanced Internet Concepts. (3) Crosslisted as ITCS 1102. Prerequisite: ITCS 1101 or permission of the department. This course is an advanced study of the Internet environment. This course is designed for any student who is familiar with office productivity tools and a user of Internet technologies; it addresses advanced concepts of computer literacy. Topics include: concepts of website design and how to evaluate websites; proper use of synchronous and asynchronous communication tools (e.g., chat, email, IM); issues of copyright and cyber-ethics; using the Internet to do research; and publishing via the Internet. Other topics may be added to keep the content current and relevant. Students will complete extensive Internet oriented projects to demonstrate mastery of the skills discussed in class. (May not be taken for credit by ITIS majors.) (Fall, Spring)(Internet)
ITIS 1200. Freshman Seminar. (3) Prerequisite: permission of department. An introductory Information Technology course designed to assist students with the transition to college by acquainting them with the University’s resources and support, exploring opportunities in the IT field, and developing a strong sense of community within the College of Computing & Informatics and the University as a whole. The development of learning skills, time management skills, and other life skills necessary for college success will be emphasized. (Fall) (Days)
ITIS 1203. Survey of Computing. (3) Cross-listed as ITCS 1203. Introductory course that explores the broad field of computing as it applies to daily life. Topics cover computers of all sizes from handheld devices to super computers; the role of software from operating systems to applications; the software development process; issues of security and privacy on the Internet and the World Wide Web; and possible fields of study within the broad field of information technology. (Fall, Spring)
ITIS 1210. Introduction to Web-Based Information Systems. (3) Introductory course in developing Web pages for both majors and non-majors. Topics include an introduction to the mechanisms by which the Internet and the World Wide Web operate, general concepts related to Web-based information systems, the design and construction of Web infrastructure including authoring tools, domain registration, legal and ethical considerations, and basic Web security. (Fall, Spring) (Evenings)
ITIS 1301. Introduction to the Financial Services Industry. (3) Cross-listed as ITCS 1301. The objective of this course is to provide the student with an overview of the financial services industry, to include such areas as the industry components; regulatory considerations and their impact; and relations with other institutions. (Fall, Summer)
ITIS 2110. IT Infrastructure I: Design and Practice. (3) Prerequisite: Sophomore standing or permission of the department. This course covers basics concepts for IT infrastructure systems administration such as networking administration (e.g., DNS configuration, router configuration, firewall setup, and web server configurations), operating system administration (e.g., account and privilege management, and service management). The course will have heavy hands-on laboratory emphasis. (Fall, Spring)
ITIS 2211. Ethical Issues in Personal, Professional, and Public Life: Technology. (3) Prerequisite: for CCI majors only. An analysis of the conceptual tools needed to make informed, responsible judgments based on the ability to think critically and knowledgeably about issues of personal, professional, and public ethics and morality. The study of a variety of ethical views and ethical issues. Successful completion of the course satisfies the LBST 2211 requirement for General Education. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
ITIS 2300. Web-Based Application Development. (3) Prerequisite: ITCS 1214, or permission of the department. Basic concepts for developing interactive web based applications; HTML, client side scripting, server side scripting, user interface design considerations, information security and privacy considerations, system integration considerations. Students will be required to develop working prototypes of web-based applications. (Fall)
ITIS 2301. Financial Services Computing Environment. (3) Cross-listed as ITCS 2301. Prerequisite: ITCS/ITIS 1301. The objective is for the student to gain insights on several key components in financial computing environments and the enabling technologies. (Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
ITIS 3100. Introduction to IT Infrastructure Systems. (3) Prerequisite: ITIS 2300. This course discusses methodologies, tools, and technologies that are important for understanding various IT infrastructure systems such as file storage services, email services, and web services. Focus will be placed on understanding widely-used network infrastructure services and systems, and acquiring basic knowledge in design practices and management of such systems. Can serve as a prerequisite course for ITIS 3200, ITIS 4220. (Fall, Spring) (Evenings)
ITIS 3105. Server-Side Applications and Data Management. (3) Prerequisites: ITIS 2300 and ITCS 1215, or permission of the department. This course covers principles that are important for implementing advanced Web-based applications. Emphasis will be placed on industrial and business applications which require robust and secure implementations. Serverside scripting and processing techniques will be exercised in class projects. (Spring)
ITIS 3106. Structured System Analysis and Design. (3) Prerequisite: ITCS 1215 or permission of the department. Structured systems development. Strategies and techniques of structured analysis and structured design to produce logical methodologies for dealing with complexity in the development of information systems. (Summer) (Evenings)
ITIS 3110. IT Infrastructure II: Design and Practice. (3) Prerequisite: ITIS 2110 or permission of the department. This course covers concepts for the design and implementation of robust IT infrastructures. Topics covered include system hardening, secured access, penetration testing, file storage services, as well as advanced topics in design and configuration of network based services. The course will have heavy hands-on laboratory emphasis. (Fall, Spring)
ITIS 3130. Human-Computer Interaction. (3) Prerequisite: Sophomore standing. Concepts of the design of the human-machine environment, with special emphasis on human-computer interaction and how people acquire, store, and use data from the environment and from computers. Topics include: analysis, creation and improvement of equipment and environment to make them compatible with human capabilities and expectation; analysis of existing equipment with respect to user usability and interfacing capabilities. (Fall) (Evenings)
ITIS 3131. Human and Computer Info Processing. (3) Prerequisite: ITIS 2300 or permission of the department. Overview of methods people use to acquire, store, and use the data they receive from the environment and their implementation of computers. Topics include: perception, pattern recognition, attention, memory, knowledge representation, language, and problem solving. (On demand)
ITIS 3132. Information Systems. (3) Prerequisite: ITIS 2300 or permission of the department. Analysis, design, implementation, and evaluation of information systems. Topics include: techniques of manipulating data; behavioral component of dealing with the user and integration of technology, procedures, and people. (On demand)
ITIS 3150. Rapid Prototyping and Interface Building. (3) Students will learn various ways to rapidly prototype interface design ideas. This course will teach the theory behind rapid prototyping and how it relates to Human-Computer Interaction. Students will study low fidelity prototyping methods such as FIDO design and paper prototyping, and then move into higher fidelity prototyping methods such as throwaway digital prototyping. Evolutionary prototyping, interface building using high-level programming languages, will be covered. In addition to software prototyping, students will also perform blank model prototyping for physical devices. (On demand)
ITIS 3200. Introduction to Information Security and Privacy. (3) Prerequisite: ITCS 1215 or permission of the department. This courses provides an introductory overview of key issues and solutions for information security and privacy. Topics include security concepts and mechanisms; security technologies; authentication mechanisms; mandatory and discretionary controls; basic cryptography and its applications; intrusion detection and prevention; information systems assurance; anonymity and privacy issues for information systems. ITIS 3300. Software Requirements and Project Management. (3) Prerequisite: ITIS 2300 or permission of the department. Introduction to requirement engineering and project management methodologies. Topics include: requirements elicitation, specification, and validation; structural, informational, behavioral, security, privacy, and computer user interface requirements; scenario analysis; application of object-oriented methodologies in requirements gathering; spiral development model; risk management models; software engineering maturity model; project planning and milestones; cost estimation; team organizations and behavior. Case studies will be used. (On demand)
ITIS 3301. Introduction to the Regulatory Environment for Financial Services Firms. (3) Crosslisted as ITCS 3301. Prerequisite: ITCS/ITIS 2301. Using case studies, enable the student to understand the compliance and regulatory environment that currently exists for Financial Services firms. (Fall, Summer) (Evenings)
ITIS 3310. Software Architecture and Design. (3) Prerequisite: ITCS 2214 or permission of the department. Introduction to software design with emphasis on architectural design and design patterns. Models of software architecture. Architecture styles and patterns, including explicit, event-driven, clientserver, and middleware architectures. Decomposition and composition of architectural components and interactions. Use of non-functional requirements for tradeoff analysis. Component based software development, deployment and management. A system design language, such as UML, will be introduced and used throughout the course. ITIS 3320. Introduction to Software Testing and Assurance. (3) Prerequisite: ITIS 3200 and ITIS 3300 or permission of the department. Methods of evaluating software for correctness, and reliability including code inspections, program proofs and testing methodologies. Formal and informal proofs of correctness. Code inspections and their role in software verification. Unit and system testing techniques, testing tools and limitations of testing. Statistical resting, reliability models. (Fall, Spring)
ITIS 3590. Software and Information Systems Cooperative Education and 49ership Experience. (0) This course is required of Co-op and 49ership students during the semester they are working. Acceptance into the Experiential Learning Program is required. Participating students pay a course registration fee for transcript notation. Assignments must be arranged and approved in advance. Course may be repeated. Evaluation is Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory. Only open to undergraduate students; Graduate level students are encouraged to contact their academic departments to inquire about academic or industrial internship options for credit. For more information, contact the University Career Center. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ITIS 3695. Software and Information Systems Cooperative Education Seminar. (1) Required of Coop students immediately following each work assignment for presentation of reports on work done the prior semester. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ITIS 4166. Network-Based Application Development. (3) Prerequisite: ITIS 2300 and ITIS 3200 or permission of the department. This course examines the issues related to network based application development. Topics include introduction to computer networks, web technologies and standards, network based programming methodologies, languages, tools and standards. (Fall, Spring) (Evenings)
ITIS 4170. Advanced Client Applications. (3) This course covers the theory and practice of techniques to develop Web applications that have the features and functionality of traditional desktop applications, dealing with the browser as graphical user interface and the Internet as platform, with attention to interactivity, speed, functionality, and usability. Technologies covered include: X/D/HTML, DOM, CSS, and client-side scripting for layout and formatting, data interaction formats such as XML and JSON, and asynchronous server interaction with client-side scripting and XML (AJAX). The course will examine emerging frameworks for development support, as well as typical applications such as mapping "mashups," folksonomies, and social networking. (Spring)
ITIS 4220. Vulnerability Assessment and Systems Assurance. (3) Prerequisite: ITIS 3200 or permission of the department. This course discusses methodologies, tools, and technologies that are important for vulnerability assessment and systems assurance. Topics covered include: ethical hacking techniques, vulnerability assessment, risk assessment/management, finding new exploits, discovering vulnerabilities, penetrating network perimeters, bypassing auditing systems, and assured administration of systems as well as evaluating systems assurance levels. Focus will be placed on 1) understanding current penetration techniques for networks, operating systems, services and applications; 2) investigating mitigation and defense strategies; and 3) studying legal and ethical considerations. the course is based on case studies with a strong lab component. (Fall, Spring)
ITIS 4221. Secure Programming and Penetration Testing. (3) Prerequisite: ITIS 4166 or permission of the department. This course covers techniques for web application penetration testing, secure software development techniques for network based applications. Automated approaches such as static code analysis and application scanning will also be discussed. (On demand)
ITIS 4250. Computer Forensics. (3) Prerequisites: ITIS 2300 or permission of the department. The identification, extraction, documentation, interpretation, and preservation of computer media for evidentiary purposes and/or root cause analysis. Topics include techniques for discovering digital evidence; responding to electronic incidents; tracking communications through networks; understanding electronic media, crypto-literacy, data hiding, hostile code and Windows™ and UNIX™ system forensics; and the role of forensics in the digital environment. (On demand)
ITIS 4640. Financial Services Informatics Industry Foundations Capstone I. (3) Cross-listed as ITCS 4640. Prerequisite: Senior standing. An individual or group project in the theory, teaching, or application of Financial Services Informatics under the direction of a faculty member. Projects must be approved before they may be initiated. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ITIS 4641. Financial Services Informatics Industry Foundations Capstone II. (3) Cross-listed as ITCS 4641. Prerequisite: ITCS/ITIS 4640. A continuation of ITCS/ITIS 4640. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
ITIS 4990. Undergraduate Research. (3) Prerequisite: Permission of the department. This course consists of undergraduate research under the supervision and direction of a faculty member. Course may be repeated in subsequent terms for a maximum of 6 hours total. (On demand)
ITLN 1201. Elementary Italian I. (4) Fundamentals of the Italian language, including speaking, listening comprehension, reading, and writing. (Fall)
ITLN 1202. Elementary Italian II. (4) Prerequisite: ITLN 1201 or permission of the department. Fundamentals of the Italian language, including speaking, listening comprehension, reading, and writing. (Spring)
ITLN 2201. Intermediate Italian I. (3) Prerequisite: ITLN 1202 or permission of the department. Review of grammar, conversation, and composition. (On demand)
ITLN 2202. Intermediate Italian II. (3) Prerequisite: ITLN 2201 or permission of the department. Continued review of grammar, conversation, and composition. (On demand)
JAPN 1201. Elementary Japanese I. (4) Acquisition of communicative competence in speaking, listening comprehension, reading, and writing at a beginning level, with attention to cultural awareness. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
JAPN 1202. Elementary Japanese II. (4) Prerequisite: JAPN 1201 or permission of the department. Continuation of JAPN 1201. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
JAPN 2201. Intermediate Japanese I. (4) Prerequisite: JAPN 1202 or permission of the department. Acquisition of communicative competence in speaking, listening comprehension, reading, and writing at an intermediate level, with attention to cultural awareness. (Fall, Spring)
JAPN 2202. Intermediate Japanese II. (4) Prerequisite: JAPN 2201 or permission of the department. Continuation of JAPN 2201. (Fall, Spring)
JAPN 3201. Advanced Japanese Grammar, Composition and Conversation I. (4) Prerequisite: JAPN 2202 or permission of the department. Review of Japanese grammar and guided conversation on prepared topics. Emphasis on spoken Japanese. (Fall, Spring)
JAPN 3202. Advanced Japanese Grammar, Composition and Conversation II. (4) Prerequisite: JAPN 3201 or permission of the department. Review of Japanese grammar and guided compositions on prepared topics. Emphasis on vocabulary, idiomatic expressions, and stylistics. (Fall, Spring)
JAPN 3209. Japanese Civilization and Culture. (3) Conducted in English. No knowledge of Japanese required. Geographical, historical, and artistic features of Japanese culture as well as aspects of life, thought, and customs of the Japanese-speaking people. Presentations, discussions, and viewing of films. (Fall, Spring)
JAPN 3210. Advanced Japanese Civilization, Culture, and History. (3) Prerequisite: JAPN 2202 or permission of the department. Advanced study of life and thought of Japanese-speaking people. (Fall, Spring)
JAPN 3800. Directed Individual Study. (1-3) Prerequisite: permission of the department. Individual work on a selected area of study with the instructor, generally arranged during the preceding semester. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
JAPN 4410. Professional Internship in Japanese. (1- 6) Prerequisites: JAPN 3201 and 3202, or equivalent and permission of the department. Facultysupervised field and/or research experience in a cooperating professional (e.g., business) or community organization (e.g., school). Contents of internship based upon a contractual agreement among the student, department, and business or community organization. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
JOUR 2100. Language Craft. (2) Prerequisite: Restricted to Pre-Communication and Communication Studies majors and Journalism minors. In-depth examination of correct grammar, punctuation and writing style. Refinement of students’ writing skills for journalism and public relations applications. Introduction to Associated Press Stylebook. Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. (Fall, Spring)
JOUR 2160. Introduction to Journalism. (3) Pre- or corequisite: JOUR 2100. Prerequisite: Restricted to Pre-Communication and Communication Studies majors and Journalism minors. Introduction to the basics of print journalism. Students cover a variety of stories designed to develop news and feature reporting/writing skills. Emphasis is placed on generating story ideas, making ethical news judgments, diversity issues in journalism, gathering information, and writing and editing articles. Students are also introduced to Associated Press style. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
JOUR 3050. Topics in Journalism. (3) Prerequisite: JOUR 2160. Timely and important areas relevant to journalism. May be repeated with permission of journalism advisor. (On demand)
JOUR 3160. Advanced News Reporting and Writing. (3) Prerequisite: JOUR 2160 or permission of the instructor. This advanced journalism course continues the study of reporting and writing techniques introduced in JOUR 2160. Course covers news reporting and writing, with emphasis on the print media. Students survey a variety of news sources to become familiar with current events and the various approaches and styles of coverage. (Fall, Spring)
JOUR 3161. News Editing. (3) Prerequisite: JOUR 2160 or permission of instructor. Basic studies in selection, preparation and presentation of news, with primary emphasis on newspapers. Examination of the effects of competition in multimedia news markets. Emphasis on issues of ethics, fairness and accuracy in news coverage. Diversity and legal guidelines affecting news presentation are reviewed. (Spring)
JOUR 3162. Feature Writing. (3) Prerequisite: JOUR 2160 or permission of the instructor. In depth feature writing for printed newspapers, magazines and newsletters, as well as online publications. Students select feature topics, conduct interviews and gather relevant information to write and edit stories. Students also learn how to market feature articles. (Fall, Spring)
JOUR 3163. Visual Communication in Media. (3) Prerequisite: JOUR 2160 or permission of the instructor. Course familiarizes the student with principles, theory and techniques of visual communication and explores the role and dynamics of shaping an “image” through the use of visual communication. Students are exposed to the editing and production aspects of communication visually. (Fall, Spring)
JOUR 3401. Journalism Practicum. (2) Provides students with practical experience working with Student Media on campus. (Two semester enrollment limit) (Fall, Spring)
LACS 1201. Elementary Foreign Language. (3-4) Prerequisite: permission of the department. Fundamentals of grammar and phonetics, reading, writing and conversation of a selected language. (On demand)
LACS 1202. Elementary Foreign Language. (3-4) Prerequisite: LACS 1201 or permission of the department. Continuation of 1201. (On demand)
LACS 2050. Topics in Foreign Language. (1-4) Studies in a selected field of interest. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (On demand)
LACS 2201. Intermediate Foreign Language. (3-4) Prerequisite: LACS 1202 or permission of the department. Grammar review, conversation, composition and readings based on the culture and civilization. (On demand)
LACS 2202. Intermediate Foreign Language. (3-4) Prerequisite: LACS 2201 or permission of the department. Grammar, conversation, composition and readings based on students' needs. (On demand)
LACS 3050. Topics in Language, Literature and Culture. (3)  Studies in a selected field of interest. May be repeated for credit. (On demand)
LACS 3160. European Cinema. (3) (W, O) Prerequisites: Sophomore standing and ENGL 1102 or equivalent. Introduction to films of the various national cinemas of Europe and strategies for analyzing and discussing film critically and effectively. Lectures, discussions, viewing films, writing assignments, reviews, critiques, and analyses. (Spring, Fall)
LACS 3201. Advanced Foreign Language I. (3) Prerequisite: LACS 2202 or permission of the department. Review of grammar and guided conversation on prepared topics. Emphasis on spoken language. (On demand)
LACS 3202. Advanced Foreign Language II. (3) Prerequisite: LACS 3201 or permission of the department. Review of grammar and guided compositions on prepared topics. Emphasis on vocabulary, idiomatic expressions, and stylistics. (On demand)
LACS 3800. Directed Individual Study. (1-3) Prerequisite: Permission of the department; normally open only to foreign language majors and minors. Individual work on a selected area of study. To be arranged with the instructor, generally during the preceding semester, and by special permission only. May be repeated for credit. (On demand)
LACS 4050. Topics in Foreign Language. (3) Prerequisite: Senior standing or permission of the department. Studies in a selected field of interest. May be repeated for credit with change of topic. (On demand)
LACS 4690. Senior Seminar. (1) Prerequisites: four or more courses at the 3000 or 4000 level in the major or permission of the department. Survey of career options for foreign language majors, directed professional development (preparation of resume and portfolio), and completion of departmental required assessments in the areas of speaking, reading, writing, grammar, and content knowledge of the major. (Fall, Spring) Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. LACS 4800. Directed Individual Study. (1-3) Prerequisite: permission of the department; normally open only to foreign language majors and minors. Individual work on a selected area of study. To be arranged with the instructor, generally during the preceding semester, and by special permission only. May be repeated for credit. (On demand)
LATN 1201. Elementary Latin I. (4) Beginning survey of elementary Latin grammar through selected readings. (Fall)
LATN 1202. Elementary Latin II. (4) Prerequisite: LATN 1201 or equivalent. Completion of the survey of elementary Latin grammar; connected readings in elementary to intermediate Latin prose. (Spring)
LATN 2201. Latin Prose. (3) Prerequisite: LATN 1202 or equivalent. Extended selected readings in Latin prose of intermediate difficulty: Caesar, Nepos, or Seneca. (Offered online on demand)
LATN 3800. Directed Individual Reading. (1-3) Prerequisite: permission of instructor. Individual work on an author or genre to be arranged with the instructor. (On demand)
LBST 1101. The Arts and Society: Dance. (3) An introduction to dance in the context of the arts and society. Exploration of the similarities among selected folk and ethnic dance traditions from around the world in terms of functionality; how 20th century American concert dance, social dance, and popular entertainment dance reflect those traditions; sociopolitical issues evidenced in choreography through lectures, discussion, film video, and live dance performance. May not be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
LBST 1102. The Arts and Society: Film. (3) An introduction to the art of film in the context of the arts and society. Analysis of the elements of narrative and documentary film, including works made for television. Examines the role of Hollywood, international, and independent cinema (including television) in reflecting, shaping, and critiquing society. May not be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
LBST 1103. The Arts and Society: Music. (3) This course is an introduction to music in the context of the arts and society. Students will survey the position of music in selected cultures from around the world. Emphasis will be placed on music in the United States and Europe. Students will experience a wide range of ideas and styles and move toward thoughtful, critical, and creative listening. Through this course students will gain a deeper understanding of the place of music in reflecting, shaping and critiquing society. May not be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
LBST 1104. The Arts and Society: Theater. (3) An introduction to theater in the context of the arts and society. Analysis of the elements that make up theatrical events. The place of theater in reflecting, shaping, and critiquing society. May not be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
LBST 1105. The Arts and Society: Visual Arts. (3) An introduction to the visual arts in the context of the arts and society. The analysis of visual culture in a variety of media and genres in different historical periods and geographic locations. The function, meaning, and politics of individual works of art and art movements. Also addresses the role of art as a site for the articulation of value systems, including gender, class, and race. May not be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
LBST 2101. Western Cultural and Historical Awareness. (3) All sections of this course explore a major aspect of Western culture. Particular attention is given to an examination of the constructed nature of the present through a close examination of the past and the ways that selected institutions, ideas, or practices change over time and spread in human society, producing both continuity and novelty. May not be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
LBST 2102. Global and Intercultural Connections. (3) All sections of this course examine two or more cultures in their own contexts and in the contexts of the global conditions and influences that impact all major world cultures today. Particular attention is given to an analysis of the complex nature of globalization and to a consideration of both its positive and negative impacts. May not be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
LBST 2211. Ethical Issues in Personal, Professional, and Public Life. (3) An analysis of the conceptual tools needed to make informed, responsible judgments based on the ability to think critically and knowledgeably about issues of personal, professional, and public ethics and morality. The study of a variety of ethical views and ethical issues. May not be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
LBST 2212. Literature and Culture. (3) This course examines the connections between literature and culture. Students are offered the opportunity to examine the roles that literature plays in reflecting, shaping, and challenging cultures. May not be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
LBST 2213. Science, Technology, and Society. (3) The role of science and technology in society. The appreciation and understanding of science and the public policy issues related to science and technology. Issues such as science vs. pseudoscience, the ethics of science and technology, the methods of the sciences, the importance of major scientific discoveries, and public expectations of the sciences. May not be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring) (Evenings)
LBST 2214. Issues of Health and Quality of Life. (3) A study of individual and social aspects of health. Analysis of individual health and illness behavior and theory; the social, political, and economic contexts of health and illness; and the broad cultural, ethical, and religious understandings of health and illness. May not be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
LBST 2215. Citizenship. (3) A study of the concept of citizenship as it has evolved in different cultures with an emphasis on scholarly understandings of the rights and responsibilities of citizenship. Includes an examination of the ethical dimensions of citizenship in political, social, and religious contexts. The course includes a service component that allows students to explore the relations of citizenship and public service. During the semester the course meets a total of 27 hours for classroom lectures and discussions and requires completion of 25 hours of voluntary service in the community. May not be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
LTAM 1100. Introduction to Latin America. (3)  An introductory, interdisciplinary survey of the field of Latin American Studies. Course will focus on the culture, economy, geography, history, politics, and society of Latin America, as well as on the diverse ways in which scholars have studied the region. (Fall, Spring)
LTAM 2001. Topics in Latin American Studies. (3) Analysis of a selected topic related to Latin American Studies. This course will fulfill an elective in the “Economy and Society” course requirements. The particular topic of the course may vary from semester to semester. A student may repeat the course credit as topics vary. (On demand)
LTAM 2002. Topics in Latin American Studies. (3) Analysis of a selected topic related to Latin American Studies. This course will fulfill an elective in the “Historical Perspective” course requirements. The particular topic of the course may vary from semester to semester. A student may repeat the course credit as topics vary. (On demand)
LTAM 2003. Topics in Latin American Studies. (3) Analysis of a selected topic related to Latin American Studies. This course will fulfill an elective in the “Arts and Literature” course requirements. The particular topic of the course may vary from semester to semester. A student may repeat the course credit as topics vary. (On demand)
LTAM 2116. Contemporary Latin America. (3) Crosslisted as ANTH 2116. A survey of the people and cultures of Mexico, Central America, South America, and the Caribbean. Areas of investigation include religion, race, ethnicity, gender, kinship, social inequality, and economic development. (Alternate years)
LTAM 2117. Cultures of the Caribbean. (3) Crosslisted as ANTH 2117. An introduction to society and culture in the Caribbean region. Areas of investigation include ethnicity, nationalism, family and community structure, economy, religion, and politics. (Yearly)
LTAM 2206. Colonial Latin America. (3) Cross-listed as HIST 2206. A survey of major political, economic, and cultural developments from earliest times to 1826. (Yearly)
LTAM 2207. Modern Latin America. (3) Cross-listed as HIST 2207. A survey of Latin American history from 1826 to the present with emphasis on the economy and society. Special attention to twentiethcentury revolutions and the role of the United States in Latin America. (Yearly)
LTAM 2252. New World Archaeology. (3) Cross-listed as ANTH 2152. Prehistory of North America; Paleoindians, Eastern United States, Southwest, Mexico; archaeological methods and theory. (Spring)
LTAM 3001. Advanced Topics in Latin American Studies. (3) Analysis of a selected topic related to Latin American Studies. This course will fulfill an elective in the “Economy and Society” course requirements. The particular topic of the course may vary from semester to semester. A student may repeat the course credit as topics vary. (On demand)
LTAM 3002. Advanced Topics in Latin American Studies. (3) Analysis of a selected topic related to Latin American Studies. This course will fulfill an elective in the “Historical Perspectives” course requirements. The particular topic of the course may vary from semester to semester. A student may repeat the course credit as topics vary. (On demand)
LTAM 3003. Advanced Topics in Latin American Studies. (3) Analysis of a selected topic related to Latin American Studies. This course will fulfill an elective in the “Arts and Literature” course requirements. The particular topic of the course may vary from semester to semester. A student may repeat the course credit as topics vary. (On demand)
LTAM 3110. Black Families in the Diaspora. (3) Cross-listed as AFRS 3210 and SOCY 3210. This course is designed to acquaint students with historical and contemporary experiences of peoples of African descent in the Caribbean and Latin American countries with specific emphasis on family structure and family relationships. Includes discussion of theories, history, impact of globalization on family structure, roles of women and identity, socioeconomic status and mobility, slavery, colonialism, and capitalism. The course is designed to provide students with a better understanding of the comparative relationships and links between family structures and common life experiences among peoples of African descent in different parts of the world, with specific emphasis on the Caribbean and Latin American regions. (On demand)
LTAM 3129. Cultural Dimension of Doing Business with Spanish-Speaking Countries. (3) Cross-listed as SPAN 3029. Prerequisite: ENGL 1102 or 1103. Development of cultural awareness for conducting business with Spanish-speaking countries and U.S. Hispanic communities. Course conducted in English. (On demand)
LTAM 3144. Latin American Politics. (3) Cross-listed as POLS 3144. Comparative overview of political and socio-economic change in Latin America from the colonial period to the present. Primary emphasis on Latin American politics in the twentieth century, competing political ideologies, socio-economic issues, international political economy, and internal political change. (Yearly)
LTAM 3154. Political Economy of Latin America. (3) Cross-listed as POLS 3155. Intersections of politics and economics in Latin America, focusing on the efforts to foster economic development in the region. Emphasis on post-World War II era. Includes issues such as debt management, dependency theory, impact of free market theories, and the power of labor movements. (Yearly)
LTAM 3164. U.S.-Latin American Relations. (3) Cross-listed as POLS 3164. Addresses the alwayscomplicated and often-conflictive relationship between Latin American and the United States. Particular attention to critical contemporary issues such as the drug trade, immigration, international trade, humanitarian aid and U.S. policy toward Cuba. (Yearly)
LTAM 3190. The Political Economy of the Caribbean. (3) Cross-listed as AFRS 3190. An examination of the manifestations of Caribbean economic problems and policies and Caribbean political development from the post-war period to the present. (Fall)
LTAM 3220. The Caribbean from Slavery to Independence. (3) Cross-listed as AFRS 3220 and HIST 3180. Covering the sweep of history from European/indigenous contact, through the construction of a plantation regime based on African slave labor, and up to the present day, this class explores the spread of colonialism, the dynamics of slavery, and the tumult of abolition and national independence movements. The Caribbean Sea will be examined as a region, emphasizing the ties uniting the islands and the circum-Caribbean coasts. The region’s past – including empire and imperial conflict, racial oppression and interaction, and international contact – and its legacies will be discussed in relation to political economics, race, and contemporary culture. (On demand)
LTAM 3255. Ancient Latin America. (3) Crosslisted as ANTH 3155. Archaeology and ethnohistory of the Aztecs, Maya, Inca, and their predecessors; includes an investigation of prehistoric urbanism, the rise and fall of complex societies, and the application of archaeological methods to complex societies. (Yearly)
LTAM 3260. Slavery, Racism and Colonialism in the African Diaspora. (3) Cross-listed as AFRS 3260 and HIST 3190. This course is designed to explore how race and racism, slavery, and colonialism served as principal institutions and constructs shaping the experience between Africa and the emerging African Diaspora in the New World. Students will consider how the maintenance of Western social, economic, and political superiority materialized as functions of these three important historical developments. (On demand)
LTAM 3270. Afro-Latin American History. (3) Crosslisted as AFRS 3270 and HIST 3181. This course explores the African Diaspora in Latin America ranging from the Caribbean Sea to the Rio de la Plata. From slavery, to fighting for freedom in the Spanish- American Wars of Independence, to forging new notions of citizenship in twentieth century Brazil, African-descended peoples have an important place in Latin America’s historical past. According special attention to regions with concentrated populations of African-descended peoples, this course reveals the vibrant history of Afro-Latin America. (On demand)
LTAM 3274. Resistance and Adaptation: Indian Peoples Under Spanish Rule. (3) Cross-listed as HIST 3174. A historical survey of the interactions of indigenous peoples of the western hemisphere with Spanish colonial authorities from the conquest era to 1825. The course focuses on the indigenous peoples of Mexico, Peru, Chile, and Argentina. (Alternate years)
LTAM 3275. Reform, Riots, and Rebellions in Colonial Spanish America, 1692-1825. (3) Crosslisted as HIST 3175. This course examines the economic, political, and cultural origins of violent conflict in colonial Latin America, culminating with an analysis of the revolutions for independence. (Alternate years)
LTAM 3276. History of Mexico. (3) Cross-listed as HIST 3176. A survey of Mexican history from pre-Columbian times to the present. Special emphasis will be given to the Spanish conquest, the colonial economy, the independence period, the revolution, and relations with the United States. (Alternate years)
LTAM 3277. The Cuban Revolution. (3) Cross-listed as HIST 3177. An examination of the economic and political forces that led to the Cuban revolution. Significant background material from the 19th and early 20th centuries will be presented in addition to an analysis of the revolution and post-revolutionary events. (Alternate years)
LTAM 3278. History of Brazil. (3) Cross-listed as AFRS 3278 and HIST 3178. A study of Brazilian history since 1500, with an emphasis on social and economic history. The course emphasizes slavery and race relations, the emergence of export economics, rural protest movements, the effects of urbanization and industrialization, and the rise and fall of the military dictatorship. Meets non-Western requirement. (Alternate years)
LTAM 3279. Authoritarianism in Latin America. (3) Cross-listed as HIST 3179. A study of authoritarian rule and resistance thereto in one or more selected Latin American countries, including but not limited to Argentina, Brazil, and Chile. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (Alternate years)
LTAM 3300. Maya Art. (3) Cross-listed as ARTH 3317. Survey of the cultures, artistic production and architecture of the Maya from c. 250 to 800 C. E. Readings and discussions focus on Maya rulership and social structure. (Spring) (Alternate years)
LTAM 3301. Mexica (Aztec) Art. (3) Cross-listed as ARTH 3318. Survey of the cultures, artistic production and architecture of the Central Mexico region from c. 1300 to the period of European invasion in the 16th century. Readings and discussions focus on artistic traditions, daily life, and political structures. (Fall)
LTAM 3302. Andean Art. (3) Cross-listed as ARTH 3319. Survey of the cultures, artistic production and architecture of the Andean region to the period of European invasion in 1532. Readings and discussions focus on artistic traditions, cosmology, and political structures. (Spring) (Alternate years)
LTAM 3309. Masterpieces of Hispanic Literature in English Translation. (3) Cross-listed as SPAN 3009 if course is on Latin America topic. Prerequisites: sophomore standing and ENGL 1102. Advanced studies of Spanish or Spanish-American literature in English translation. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. Course conducted in English. LTAM 3310. Spanish American Civilization and Culture. (3) Cross-listed as SPAN 3210. Prerequisite: SPAN 2202 or permission of department. Introduction to the cultural heritage of Spanish America. (Alternate semesters)
LTAM 3312. Introduction to Spanish American Literature. (3) Cross-listed as SPAN 3212. Prerequisite: SPAN 2202 or permission of the department. Introduction to Spanish American literature from the 16th century through the contemporary period. (Spring)
LTAM 3313. Pre-Columbian Art. (3) Cross-listed as ARTH 3112. Survey of the arts and architecture of the Americas before European contact in the 16th century. Special emphasis on the interactions of religion, social systems, and the arts as well as identification of ethnic styles of art. Discussions of readings, lectures, slides and video tapes. Essay exams. (Fall) (Alternate years)
LTAM 3319. Hispanic Women Writers in English Translation. (3)  Cross-listed as SPAN 3019 and WGST 3019. Prerequisites: sophomore standing and ENGL 1102. Examination of prose and poetry by women writers from Spain and the Americas to understand women's voices and other cultures. Conducted in English. Knowledge of Spanish not required. (On demand)
LTAM 3360. Studies in Hispanic Film. (3) Crosslisted as SPAN 3160 if course is on the Latin American topic. The study of Spanish, Spanish American and/or Hispanic/Latino films. Course conducted in English. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (Yearly)
LTAM 3400. Latin American Studies Internship. (1-3) Prerequisite: permission of the coordinator. Practical experience and/or training related to Latin American studies. A minimum of 45 hours per credit. (On demand)
LTAM 3800. Independent Study. (1-3) Supervised investigation of an issue related to Latin American Studies that is of special interest to the student and that is not covered in existing or available courses. (On demand)
LTAM 4116. Culture and Conflict in the Amazon (3) Cross-listed as ANTH 4116. This course examines the development strategies Brazil has used in the Amazon and explores how these policies have affected both the environment and the various populations living in the Amazon. Topics covered include environmental degradation, human rights abuses, culture change, migration, and globalization. (On demand). LTAM 4120. Advanced Business Spanish I. (3) Cross-listed as SPAN 4120. Prerequisites: SPAN 2210, 3201 and an additional 3000- or 4000 level course (3202 recommended), or permission of the department. Advanced studies in Business Spanish, intensive practice in speaking, listening comprehension, reading, writing, and translation in functional business areas such as economics, management, and marketing. (Fall)
LTAM 4121. Advanced Business Spanish II. (3) Cross-listed as SPAN 4121. Prerequisites: SPAN 2210, 3201 and an additional 3000- or 4000 level course (3202 recommended), or permission of the department. Advanced studies in Business Spanish, intensive practice in speaking, listening comprehension, reading, writing, and translation in functional business areas such as marketing, finance, and import-export. (Spring)
LTAM 4302. Caribbean Literature in English. (3) Cross-listed as AFRS 4102. Prerequisite: junior standing and at least one course in AFRS for AFRS majors. Topics include: loneliness, quest for identity, nationalism, protest, and the use of patois. (On demand)
LTAM 4310. Studies in Spanish American Poetry. (3) Cross-listed as SPAN 4210. Prerequisites: two 3000 level courses or permission of the department. Studies of 19th- and 20th-century Spanish American poetry. (Alternate years)
LTAM 4311. Studies in Spanish American Prose Fiction. (3) Cross-listed as SPAN 4211. Prerequisites: two 3000 level courses or permission of the department. Studies of 19th- and 20th-century Spanish American prose fiction. (Alternate years)
LTAM 4312. Studies in Spanish American Theater. (3) Cross-listed as SPAN 4212. Prerequisites: two 3000 level courses or permission of the department. Studies of 20th-century Spanish American theater. (On demand)
LTAM 4314. Studies in Hispanic Children’s Literature. (3) Cross-listed as SPAN 4214. Prerequisite: SPAN 3211 or 3212 or permission of the department. Literary works in Spanish written for children. (On demand)
LTAM 4315. Studies in Regional Literature of the Americas. (3) Cross-listed as SPAN 4215. Prerequisite: SPAN 3211 or 3212 or permission of the department. Studies of Mexican, Central American, Caribbean, Andean, Amazonian, or Southern Cone literature. Readings from representative works. Works from non Spanish speaking areas read in Spanish translation. May be repeated for credit if topics vary. (On demand)
LTAM 4316. Social, Political, Cultural, Economic Issues in Hispanic Literature. (3) Cross-listed as SPAN 4216. Prerequisite: SPAN 3211 or 3212 or permission of the department. Contextual issues surrounding Hispanic literature. (On demand)
LTAM 4317. Topics in Hispanic Culture and Civilization. (3) Cross-listed as SPAN 4217. Prerequisite: SPAN 3211 or 3212 or permission of the department. Various topics involving the fine arts: music, dance, art, film. May be repeated for credit if topic varies. Applicable toward Spanish major or minor only when taught in Spanish. (On demand)
LTAM 4318. Cuban Literature. (3) Cross-listed as SPAN 4218. Prerequisite: SPAN 3211 or 3212 or permission of the department. Cuban literary works in Spanish. (On demand)
LTAM 4322. Studies in Advanced Business Spanish. (3) Cross-listed as SPAN 4122. Prerequisite: SPAN 3201 or 3202 or 3203 and SOAN 3220 or permission of the department. Advanced studies in special topics in Business Spanish (e.g., Tourism in Spain and Latin America, Free Trade in the Americas (NAFTA/TLCAN, Mercosur, The Andean Pact, CAFTA-DR), Socioeconomic Issues in the Greater Caribbean, Business and Technology in Latin America and Spain). (On demand)
LTAM 4350. Studies in Latin American Literature. (3) Cross-listed as SPAN 4050. Prerequisites: two 3000 level courses or permission of the department. Study of a predetermined topic in Latin American literature. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (On demand)
LTAM 4600. Seminar in Latin American Studies. (3)  Prerequisite: advanced junior or senior class status. A capstone seminar involving in-depth research and analysis of a topic of common interest to Latin American Studies majors, and the elaboration of a senior writing project. May be taken more than once, in which case the second course will fulfill the capstone requirement. (Spring)
LTAM 4700. Senior Honors Thesis. (3-6) Prerequisite: senior standing, an overall minimum GPA of 3.25, and permission of the Coordinator of Latin American Studies. The preparation and presentation of an acceptable honors thesis. (On demand)
MAED 3000. Topics in Mathematics Education, Elementary. (1-6) Prerequisite: Permission of the department. Special topics in mathematics education for grades K-6. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (On demand)
MAED 3040. Topics in Mathematics Education, Middle Grades. (1-6) Prerequisite: Permission of the department. Special topics in mathematics education for middle grades. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (On demand)
MAED 3070. Topics in Mathematics Education, Secondary. (1-6) Prerequisite: Permission of the department. Special topics in mathematics education at the secondary level. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (On demand)
MAED 3222. Teaching Mathematics to Elementary School Learners, Grades K-2. (3) Prerequisites: Students must be accepted as Elementary Education majors in the College of Education. This course is designed to help students develop knowledge and understanding of school mathematics and methods for teaching mathematics to children in grades K through 2. The course focuses on the importance of learning through manipulative and concrete experiences, on and planning lessons in which students develop their ideas through action and discussion. MAED 3224. Teaching Mathematics to Elementary School Learners, Grades 3-6. (3) Prerequisites: MAED 3222. This course is designed to help students develop knowledge and understanding of school mathematics and methods for teaching mathematics to children in Grades 3 through 6. The course includes a focus on planning and developing mathematics lessons and also includes the study of a variety of techniques for assessing student learning. MAED 4103. Using Technology to Teach Secondary School Mathematics. (3) Prerequisite: Admission to Teacher Education or permission of the department. Technology as a tool for exploring mathematical ideas and representing mathematical concepts, including lab assignments related to using technology throughout the secondary school mathematics curriculum. (Spring)
MAED 4105. Geometry in the Secondary School Mathematics Curriculum. (3) Prerequisite: Admission to Teacher Education or permission of the department. Study of geometry from synthetic, transformational, and algebraic perspectives including activities and software to enhance the conjecture/theorem/proof process. (Fall)
MAED 4232. Teaching Mathematics to Middle School Learners. (3) Prerequisites: Admission to Teacher Education or permission of department. This course is the initial teaching methods course for middle school mathematics teachers. This course focuses on middle school mathematics and its relation to the K- 12 curriculum. Topics include the development of teaching strategies and activities in middle school mathematics with an emphasis on problem solving, mathematical connections, communication and assessment, including school-based field experiences. (Spring)
MAED 4252. Teaching Mathematics to Secondary School Learners. (3) Prerequisite: Admission to Teacher Education or permission of the department. This course is the initial teaching methods course for secondary school mathematics teachers. This course focuses on secondary school mathematics and its relation to the K-12 curriculum. Topics include the development of teaching strategies and activities in middle school mathematics with an emphasis on problem solving, mathematical connections, communication and assessment, including schoolbased field experiences. (Fall)
MATH 0900. Math Study Skills and Algebra Review. (1) This course prepares the student to be successful in college algebra or precalculus. Topics include a review of elementary algebra, exponents and radicals, polynomial and rational functions, equations and inequalities. Study skills needed to be successful in mathematics are an important part of this course. Placement into this course is based on the score on the Mathematics Placement Exam which is administered by the Mathematics department and is restricted to students who do not have college-level math credit. MATH 1100. College Algebra and Probability. (3) Prerequisite: appropriate score on the Mathematics Placement Test or placement by the department. The basic mathematics course for undergraduates not majoring in Mathematics, Engineering, or the Physical Sciences. Fundamental concepts of algebra. Students who already have credit for MATH 1103, 1120, 1121, or 1241 with a grade of C or better may not take 1100 for credit. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
MATH 1102. Introduction to Mathematical Thinking. (3) Prerequisite: appropriate score on the Mathematics Placement Test or placement by the department. An introduction to mathematical ideas designed primarily for non-science students. Topics are drawn from various branches of mathematics which may include algebra, geometry, number theory, probability, statistics and graph theory. Computers may be used. (Fall, Spring)
MATH 1103. Precalculus Mathematics for Science and Engineering. (3) Prerequisite: appropriate score on the Mathematics Placement Test or placement by the department. Intended for students who plan to take MATH 1241. Functions and graphs, linear and quadratic functions, polynomial and rational functions, exponential and logarithmic functions, trigonometric identities. Students who already have credit for MATH 1120, 1121, or 1241 with a grade of C or better may not take MATH 1103 for credit. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
MATH 1105. Finite Mathematics. (3) Prerequisite: appropriate score on the Mathematics Placement Test or placement by the department. Review of high school algebra, elementary matrix algebra, systems of linear equations and inequalities, elementary linear programming; probability. (Fall, Spring)
MATH 1120. Calculus. (3) Prerequisite: appropriate score on the Mathematics Placement Test, MATH 1100 or 1103, or placement by the department. Intended for students majoring in fields other than engineering, mathematics or science. Elements of differential and integral calculus for polynomial, rational, exponential, logarithmic functions, with applications to business and the social and life sciences. (May not be taken for credit if credit has been received for MATH 1121 or 1241.) (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
MATH 1121. Calculus (ET). (3) Prerequisite: appropriate score on the Mathematics Placement Test; MATH 1100 or 1103; or placement by the department. Intended for students majoring in Engineering Technology. Elements of differential and integral calculus for polynomial, rational, exponential, logarithmic and trigonometric functions, with applications to engineering. May not be taken for credit if credit has been received for MATH 1120 or 1241. (Fall, Spring) (Evenings)
MATH 1165. Introduction to Discrete Structures. (3) Prerequisite: ITCS 1214. Propositions and truth tables, sets, permutations and combinations, relations and functions, lattices, and trees. (Fall, Spring)
MATH 1241. Calculus I. (3) Prerequisite: appropriate score on the Mathematics Placement Test; MATH 1103 with a grade of C or better, or placement by the department. Designed for students majoring in Mathematics, Science, or Engineering. Elementary functions, derivatives and their applications, introduction to definite integrals. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
MATH 1242. Calculus II. (3) Prerequisite: MATH 1241 with a grade of C or better. Methods for evaluating definite integrals, applications of integration, improper integrals, infinite series, Taylor series, power series, and introduction to differential equations. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
MATH 2050. Topics in Mathematics. (2-3) Prerequisite: permission of the department. Topics in mathematics elected to supplement regular offerings at the 2000 level. (May or may not count for a Math core course for the ITCS major.) May be repeated for additional credit with the approval of the department. (On demand)
MATH 2120. Intermediate Applied Calculus. (3) Prerequisite: MATH 1120 or MATH 1241. Introduction to the calculus of functions of several variables, trigonometric functions, techniques of integration of functions of one variable, differential equations, and Taylor polynomials and infinite series. (May not be taken for credit if credit has been received for MATH 1242.) (Fall, Spring, Summer)
MATH 2164. Matrices and Linear Algebra. (3) Prerequisite: MATH 1120 or 1241 with a grade of C or better or permission of the department. Matrix algebra, systems of linear equations, vector spaces, linear transformations, determinants, inner products, eigenvalues. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
MATH 2171. Differential Equations. (3) Prerequisite: MATH 1242 with a grade of C or better. An introduction to ordinary differential equations including first order equations, general theory of linear equations, series solutions, special solutions, special equations such as Bessel's equation, and applications to physical and geometric problems. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
MATH 2241. Calculus III. (3) Prerequisite: MATH 1242 with a grade of C or better. Functions of two or more variables, vectors in two and three dimensions, partial derivatives, optimization, double and triple integrals and their applications. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
MATH 2242. Calculus IV. (3) Prerequisite: MATH 2241 with a grade of C or better. Parametric curves and surfaces, vector fields, line and surface integrals; Green’s theorem, Divergence theorem, Stoke’s theorem and applications. Fourier series and its applications. (Fall, Spring) (Evenings)
MATH 2340. Number Concepts and Relationships. (3) Prerequisite: MATH 1100 or MATH 1103 with a grade of C or better or permission of the department. A study of integers, rationals, and real numbers; conjectures and intuitive proofs in a number theory; number sequences, patterns, functions; algebraic concepts and skills. An emphasis on the development of problem-solving strategies and abilities. (May not be taken for the major or minor). (Spring)
MATH 2341. Algebra and Algebraic Structures. (3) Prerequisites: MATH 2340 with a grade of C or better or MATH 2102 with a grade of C or better or permission of the department. A study of functions and their properties arising from a variety of problem situations. Representations of real-world relationships with physical models, charts, graphs, equations, and inequalities. Properties of real and complex numbers. Concrete examples of algebraic structures such as groups, rings, fields, and vector spaces. (Fall)
MATH 2342. Data Analysis and Probability. (3) Prerequisite: STAT 1220 or STAT 1222 with a grade of C or better or permission of the department. Introduction to the statistical process. Collection of data from experiments and surveys; organizing, representing, and interpreting data; formulating arguments based on analysis. Plan and conduct experiments and simulations to determine experimental probabilities. Develop counting techniques and other methods to determine probabilities. (May not be taken for the major or minor). (Spring)
MATH 2343. Geometry and Measurement. (3) Prerequisite: MATH 1100 or MATH 1103 with a grade of C or better or permission of the department. A study of properties and relationships of shape, size, and symmetry in two and three dimensions. Explore concepts of motion in two and three dimensions through transformations. Present written and oral arguments to justify conjectures and generalizations. Become familiar with the historical development of Euclidean geometry. (May not be taken for the major or minor). (Fall)
MATH 2428. Mathematical Theory of Interest. (3) Prerequisite: MATH 1242 or 2120. The measurement of interest: simple, compound, nominal, effective, dollar-weighted, time-weighted, force of interest; yield rates; equation of value; basic and more general annuitiesamortization schedules and sinking funds. (Fall)
MATH 3050. Selected Topics in Mathematics. (2-3) Prerequisite: Permission of the department. Topics selected to supplement regular offerings at the 3000 level in mathematics or statistics. May be repeated for credit with the approval of the department. (On demand)
MATH 3116. Graph Theory. (3) Prerequisite: MATH 2164 or permission of the department. Graphs as mathematical models. Planarity, colorability, connectivity, trees. Applications and algorithms for networks, matching problems and areas of computer science. (Fall) (Alternate years)
MATH 3122. Probability and Statistics I. (3) Crosslisted as STAT 3122. Prerequisite: MATH 2241 with a grade of C or better. Sample spaces, random variables, moment generating functions, some standard distributions, multivariate distributions, laws of large numbers, limit theorems. (Fall)
MATH 3123. Probability and Statistics II. (3) Crosslisted as STAT 3123. Prerequisite: MATH/STAT 3122. Estimation, bias, consistency, efficiency, maximum likelihood estimates, sufficient statistics, testing, the power function, chi square test, Kolmogorov Smirnov test. (Spring)
MATH 3128. Actuarial Science I. (3) Prerequisite: MATH 2428 or permission of the department. The mathematical theory of compound interest, term structure of interest, annuities, perpetuities, loans, bonds, stocks, derivative, forwards, futures, short and long positions, call and put options, spreads, collars, hedging, arbitrage, and swaps. (Spring)
MATH 3129. Actuarial Science II. (3) Prerequisites: MATH 3122 and MATH 3128 or permission of the department. The theory and application of contingency mathematics in the life and casualty areas, deterministic and probabilistic models for annuities and pensions, additional models of risks and financial transactions. (Fall)
MATH 3141. Advanced Calculus of One Variable. (3) Prerequisites: MATH 2241 and 2164 with grades of C or better. Topology of the real line; continuity, uniform continuity, differentiability, integration, sequences and series of functions. (Fall) (Evenings)
MATH 3142. Advanced Calculus of Several Variables. (3) Prerequisite: MATH 3141. Continuity and differentiability of functions of several variables, inverse and implicit function theorems, integration, Fubini's theorem, change of variables, the classical integral theorems of Gauss, Green and Stokes and their generalizations. (Spring) (Evenings)
MATH 3146. Introduction to Complex Analysis. (3) Prerequisite: MATH 2241 with a grade of C or better. Analytic functions, complex integration, calculus of residues, conformal mapping. (Spring) (Alternate years)
MATH 3163. Introduction to Modern Algebra. (3)  Prerequisite: MATH 1242 and MATH 2164 with a grade of C or better or permission of the department. Examples and elementary properties of basic algebraic structures, especially groups. The course emphasizes the writing of proofs of elementary theorems. (Fall, Spring) (Evenings)
MATH 3166. Combinatorics. (3) Prerequisites: MATH 2164. Combinatorial modeling, generating functions, recurrence relations, inclusion-exclusion principle and problems from recreational mathematics. (Spring)
MATH 3171. Applied Mathematics. (3) Prerequisites: MATH 2241 and 2171 with grades of C or better. Separation of variables techniques for the classical partial differential equations of mathematical physics; Fourier series; Sturm-Liouville theory. (Fall)
MATH 3176. Numerical Analysis. (3) Prerequisites: ITCS 1214, MATH 2241 and 2171. Numerical solution of initial value and boundary value problems in ordinary differential equations, direct and iterative methods of solving systems of equations. Selected problems will be programmed for computer solution. (Spring) (Alternate years)
MATH 3181. Fundamental Concepts of Geometry. (3) Prerequisite: MATH 2164 with a grade of C or better. Foundations of geometry, transformations, comparison of Euclidean and non- Euclidean geometries. (Fall, Spring) (Evenings)
MATH 3551. Mathematics Cooperative Education and 49ership Experience. (0) Prerequisites: Sophomore standing, a 3.0 GPA in MATH/STAT/OPRS courses and permission of the department of Mathematics. Acceptance into the Experiential Learning Program by the University Career Center is required. The student will be employed in a manner that affords him/her the opportunity of using and enhancing mathematical knowledge and skills through practical experience of co-op rotation or 49ership experience. Participating students pay a course registration fee for transcript notation (49ership and co-op) and receive full-time student status (co-op only). Assignments must be arranged and approved in advance. Course may be repeated; evaluation is Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory. After completing MATH 3551, the co-op student must take MATH 3652. MATH 3551 may be repeated with permission of the department. Evaluation is Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory. Only open to undergraduate students; Graduate level students are encouraged to contact their academic departments to inquire about academic or industrial internship options for credit. For more information, contact the University Career Center. (On demand)
MATH 3652. Mathematics Cooperative Education Seminar. (1) Prerequisite: MATH 3551. The student will give an exposition of his/her work experience in MATH 3551. An exposition of underlying theoretical concepts and related ideas may also be required. (On demand)
MATH 3688. Mathematics Awareness Seminar. (0) Prerequisite: sophomore standing. Visiting speakers, discussion of internships, cooperative education and job opportunities; selected topics in mathematics. (Fall)
MATH 3689. Mathematics Project Seminar. (1)  Prerequisite: senior standing. Oral presentation by the student on an area of mathematics or a mathematical problem. (Fall, Spring)
MATH 3691. Seminar. (1-6) Prerequisite: Permission of the department. Readings, study and discussion designed to develop the student's ability to study independently and to present results properly. (On demand)
MATH 3790. Junior Honors Seminar. (3) Prerequisite: permission of the department. May be repeated once for additional credit with approval of the department. (On demand)
MATH 3791. Senior Honors Tutorial. (3) Prerequisite: Permission of the department. Individual tutorials in which the student will pursue independent study and research in any area of mathematics under the direction of one or more faculty members. The project of the student will be planned to culminate in a research paper of original or expository nature. May be repeated for additional credit with the approval of the department. (On demand)
MATH 4000. Topics in Foundations or History of Mathematics. (2-3) Prerequisite: Permission of the department. Topics in the foundations or the history of mathematics selected to supplement regular course offerings in this area of mathematics. May be repeated for credit with approval of the department. Credit for the M.A. degree in Mathematics requires approval of the department. (On demand)
MATH 4040. Topics in Analysis. (2-3) Prerequisite: permission of the department. Topics in analysis selected to supplement regular course offerings in this area of mathematics. May be repeated for credit with the approval of the department. Credit for the M.A. degree in Mathematics requires approval of the department. (On demand)
MATH 4051. Computer Exploration and Generation of Data. (3)  Prerequisite: MATH 2120 or 2241 and Stat 2122 or 2223. This is a project course. The grade will be based on from four to five projects that will utilize spreadsheet technology. It includes an introduction to a major spreadsheet, such as Excel. Assigned projects may be selected from a range of topics that include: Data Analysis and Exploration; Dynamical Models and Difference Equations (Epidemics, Harvesting Models, Population Dynamics, Predator-Prey Models); Physical Models (projectile motion, including air resistance, orbits of celestial bodies, heat propagation); Combinatorics and Probability (birthday problem, genetics, simulation of distributions); Optimization (inventory control, apportionment algorithms); Financial Mathematics (Stock Price Simulation, Pricing of Derivatives); Business Simulations (Net Present Value Comparisons and Risk Evaluation, Sensitivity Analyses). Completed projects must include written descriptions, explanation, and evaluation along with appropriate working spreadsheets that accomplish the assigned objectives. (Fall, Spring) (Evening)
MATH 4060. Topics in Algebra. (2-3) Prerequisite: Permission of the department. Topics in algebra selected to supplement regular course offerings in this area of mathematics. May be repeated for credit with the approval of the department. Credit for the M.A. degree in Mathematics requires approval of the department. (On demand)
MATH 4080. Topics in Geometry and Topology. (3) Prerequisite: Permission of the department. Topics in geometry or topology selected to supplement regular course offerings in this area of mathematics. May be repeated for credit with approval of the department. Credit for M.A. degree in Mathematics requires approval of the department. (On demand)
MATH 4109. History of Mathematical Thought. (3) Prerequisite: MATH 1241 or permission of the department. A study of the development of mathematics in its historical setting from the earliest beginnings to modern times. Not approved for the M.A. in mathematics degree. (Fall) (Evenings)
MATH 4122. Probability and Stochastic Models. (3) Prerequisite: STAT 2223 or MATH/STAT 3122. Topics include a brief review of probability, normal random variables, the Central Limit Theorem, and applications to Statistics; Poisson process, the exponential distribution, and applications in actuarial science; the binomial branch model of option pricing. (Spring) (Alternate years)
MATH 4128. Risk Theory. (3) Prerequisite: MATH 2120 or MATH 1242, STAT 2223 or MATH/STAT3122, and STAT 3110. Topics include an introduction to risk theory and the concept of VAR (Value-at-Risk), building blocks consisting of measuring financial risk, computing VAR, backtesting, portfolio risk, forecasting risks and correlation, and a study of VAR Systems including VAR Methods, stress testing, delta-normal VAR, simulations, credit and liquidity risk. (Spring)(Alternate years)
MATH 4161. Number Theory. (3) Prerequisite: MATH 3163 with a grade of C or better or permission of the department. A study of the elements of classical number theory including divisibility, congruences, diophantine equations, prime numbers and their distribution, quadratic reciprocity, number-theoretic functions, and famous unsolved problems. Not approved for the M.A. in mathematics degree. (Spring) (Alternate years)
MATH 4163. Modern Algebra. (3) Prerequisite: MATH 3163 or permission of the department. Groups, rings, integral domains, and fields. (Fall) (Alternate years)
MATH 4164. Abstract Linear Algebra. (3) Prerequisite: MATH 2164 and 3163 or permission of the department. Vector spaces over arbitrary fields, linear transformations, canonical forms, and multilinear algebra. (Spring) (Alternate years)
MATH 4181. Introduction to Topology. (3) Prerequisite: MATH 2164 with a grade of C or better. Topics from set theory and point set topology such as cardinality, order, topological spaces, metric spaces, separation axioms, compactness and connectedness. (Fall) (Alternate years)
MATH 4691. Seminar. (1-6) Prerequisite: Permission of the department. Individual or group investigation and exposition of selected topics in mathematics. (On demand)
MATH 4692. Seminar. (1-6) Prerequisite: Permission of the department. A continuation of MATH 4691. (On demand)
MDLG 3130. The Early Adolescent Learner. (4) Prerequisite: Admission to Teacher Education. Physical, sexual, social, cognitive, and emotional development in the 10-15 year old with emphasis on how these developmental diversities affect the middle grades classroom. Includes 40 hours of field experiences. (Fall)
MDLG 3131. The Philosophy and Curriculum of Middle Grades Education. (4) Prerequisites: MDLG 3130, admission to Teacher Education. Overview of education in the middle grades (6-9) with emphasis on the foundational components, organizational patterns, instructional programs, and integrated curriculum unique to the middle school. Includes 40 hours field experiences. (Spring)
MDLG 3800. Individual Study in Middle Grades Education. (1-6) Prerequisite: Permission of the student’s advisor. Independent study under the supervision of an appropriate faculty member. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
MDLG 4430. Student Teaching/Seminar: 6-9 Middle Grades Education. (15)  Prerequisite: Completion of all coursework and approval of an Application for Student Teaching. Planned sequence of experiences in the student’s two areas of content specialization conducted in an approved middle school setting under the supervision and coordination of a University supervisor and a cooperating teacher. The student must demonstrate the competencies identified for his/her specific teaching fields in appropriate gradelevel settings. Approximately 35 to 40 hours per week in an assigned school setting, teaching in two areas of concentration and 10-12 on-campus seminars scheduled throughout the semester. (Fall, Spring)
MLDG 4471. Middle Grades Clinical Experience. (3) Program of learning activities in the student's level and/or area of academic concentration in an approved school setting (gr. 6-9). (On demand)
MDSK 2100. Diversity and Inclusion in Secondary Schools. (3) Introduction to the contexts, challenges, and changes in U.S. secondary education; emphasis on diversity in student populations including special needs students; examination of diversity in schools, including school organizations, approaches to teaching, purposes and expectations for public education, and communities. 10 hours of observations and participation in school settings required. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
MDSK 3150. Research and Analysis of Teaching Middle School Learners. (3)  Should be taken in the semester prior to student teaching. Concepts, methods, and practices used by effective teachers in their daily classroom routines, including systematic observation skills, interpretation of observation data, and application of research-based findings. Includes 20 hours of field experiences. (Fall, Spring)
MDSK 3151. Instructional Design and the Use of Technology with Middle and Secondary School Learners. (3) Prerequisite: EDUC 2100, SECD 3140 or MDLG 3130, SPED 2100, and admission to Teacher Education. Setting goals and objectives for instruction; planning activities and writing assessments based on objectives; use of computer software for the creation of units, lesson plans, and teacher-made tests. (Fall, Spring)
MDSK 3160. Learning and Development: Birth through Adolescence. (3) Prerequisites: EDUC 2100, SPED 2100, and admission to Teacher Education. Theories of learning and development and a systematic examination of childhood and adolescence, with particular attention to biological, social, and cognitive areas of child development. Includes 10 hours of field experiences. (Fall)
MDSK 3161. K-12 Curriculum Studies. (3) Prerequisites: EDUC 2100, SPED 2100, and admission to Teacher Education. Curriculum planning and development skills with emphasis on relating school content and skills to societal and individual needs, designing and implementing integrated activities, and examining the nature and functions of schools. (Spring)
MDSK 4150. Assessment, Reflection, and Management Practices. (3) Corequisites: SECD 4451, 4452, 4453, or 4454. Concepts, methods, and practices used by effective teachers in their daily classroom routine, including assessment, reflection, classroom and behavior management. Course may be taught on site at a Professional Development School. Includes 30 hours of field experiences. (Fall, Spring)
MDSK 4200. Secondary Methods – Foreign Languages. (3) Prerequisite: Completion of at least two 3000-level courses or equivalent in the target language, or permission of the department. Current trends and practices in teaching foreign and second languages in the high school, with emphasis on practical applications. Addresses state-mandated competencies. Required for licensure in the teaching of French, German, or Spanish (K-12). (Fall)
MDSK 4201. Elementary Methods – Foreign Languages . (3) Prerequisite: Completion of at least two 3000-level courses or equivalent in the target language, or permission of the department. Current trends and practices in teaching foreign and second languages in the elementary school and middle school (K-8), with emphasis on practical applications. Addresses state-mandated competencies. Required for licensure in the teaching of French, German, or Spanish (K-12). (Spring) (Evenings)
MDSK 4251. Teaching Science to Middle and Secondary School Learners. (3) Should be taken semester prior to student teaching. Preparation to teach science at the middle and secondary school levels with emphasis on a holistic, interdisciplinary understanding of science; science as related to everyday life and society; and interdisciplinary aspects of science. Includes 15 hours of field experiences. (Fall, Spring)
MDSK 4253. Teaching Social Studies to Middle and Secondary School Learners. (3) Should be taken semester prior to student teaching. A methods course for teaching social studies at the middle and secondary school levels. Emphasis on using social science content to develop effective teaching strategies, instructional plans, and classroom materials for teaching social studies to middle and secondary school students. Includes 15 hours of field experiences. (Fall, Spring)
MDSK 4469. Student Teaching/Seminar: K-12 Foreign Language. (15) Prerequisite: Approval of an Application for Student Teaching. A planned sequence of experiences in the student’s area of language specialization (French, German, or Spanish)
MEGR 2141. Engineering Mechanics I. (3) Prerequisites: PHYS 2101 and MATH 1242 with a grade of C or better. This course introduces the principles of particle and rigid body mechanics with engineering applications. Force systems and resultants. The equilibrium of particles and rigid bodies. Friction. Properties of areas and volumes. MEGR 2144. Introduction to Solid Mechanics. (3) Prerequisites: MEGR 2141 with a grade of C or better and MATH 2241. Engineering theory of deformable solids and applications. Stress and deformation resulting from axial, torsion and bending loads. Shear and moment diagrams, Mohr’s circle for stress and strain and buckling of columns. MEGR 2156. Design Projects Laboratory I. (2) Prerequisites: ENGR1201, ENGR1202, PHYS 2102, MEGR 2141 with a grade of C or better, and MATH 2241. Corequisite: MEGR 2180 Manufacturing Systems. Introduction to design as well as the fundamentals of manufacturing, including computeraided manufacturing (CAM). Emphasis will be placed on design visualization, functional analysis, and design prototyping. Student designs will be manufactured to verify design concepts. MEGR 2180. Manufacturing Systems. (3) Prerequisites: ENGR 1202, PHYS 2102L, MEGR 2141 with a grade of C or better, and MATH 2241. Corequisite: MEGR 2156, Design Projects Laboratory I. The course will impart a broad overview of manufacturing materials, processes, and procedures. Topics include mechanical behavior and physical properties, basic materials, casting, rolling, forming, welding, cutting, surfaces, engineering metrology, quality assurance, and automation. Basic concepts of engineering economics and cost estimating. The economics of manufacturing will also be introduced, including the time value of money, economic analysis, and cost estimating. MEGR 2299. Motorsports Engineering Clinic I. (1) Prerequisite: admission to Motorsports concentration; sophomore standing. An examination of various aspects of automotive and motorsports engineering presented by faculty and industry representatives. Participation as a Motorsports Trainee (MT) is required. MT’s are assigned to automotive projects on campus and/or with industrial partners. MEGR 2240. Computational Methods for Engineers. (3) Prerequisites: MEGR 2141 with a grade of C or better and MATH 2241. Automated engineering analysis and synthesis techniques based on software engineering principles. Overview of data representation and computing languages. Program development using programming languages and offthe shelf software packages. Study of numerical methods, potential errors, and computational stability. emphasis on effective design, testing, and debugging practices. Upper division engineering courses (3000 level and above) used to satisfy degree requirements within the College of Engineering are restricted to majors and minors of the College of Engineering. MEGR 3090. Special Topics in Mechanical Engineering. (1-4) Prerequisite: permission of the department. The course will build upon and synthesize the knowledge the students have gained from the mechanical engineering core curriculum. The specific topics covered in each separate offering of the course will serve as the vehicle for teaching engineering analysis, synthesis and design, while simultaneously affording an opportunity for the students to point themselves toward an area of specialization. May be repeated for credit. (Technical Elective)
MEGR 3111. Thermodynamics I. (3) Prerequisite: MATH 2171 with a grade of C or better. First and second laws of thermodynamics. Work and heat carnot cycle. Ideal and real gases. Non-reactive mixture of gases. Availability and irreversibility. MEGR 3112. Thermodynamics II. (3) Prerequisite: MEGR 3111, with a grade of C or better. General thermodynamic relations; equations of state and generalized charts. Combustion, dissociation, and chemical equilibrium. Introduction to power cycles. MEGR 3114. Fluid Mechanics. (3) Prerequisite: MEGR 3121 with a grade of C or better. Basic concepts of a fluid and the fundamentals of ideal and real fluid flow. Topics include fluid statics, conservation principles, Bernoulli’s equation, fluid flow in pipes, and measurement devices. MEGR 3116. Introduction to Heat Transfer. (3) Prerequisites: MATH 2171 and MEGR 3111, both with a grade of C or better. One and two dimensional steady state conduction. Finite difference methods. Radiative heat transfer, emissivity, black body radiation. Heat exchange among two and multi-body systems. Introduction to concepts and applications of convective heat transfer. MEGR 3121. Dynamics Systems I. (3) Prerequisites: MEGR 2141 and MATH 1242, both with a grade of C or better. The kinematics and kinetics of rigid bodies. Work-energy and impulse-momentum principles and conservation laws. Introduction to the kinematics of mechanisms. MEGR 3122. Dynamic Systems II. (3) Prerequisites: MEGR 2240, MEGR 3121 and MATH 2171, all with a grade of C or better. Modeling of mechanical dynamic systems. Vibration of lumped mass systems. Analysis and design of mechanical systems using time domain and frequency domain methods. MEGR 3131. Introduction to Electronic Materials. (3) Prerequisite: PHYS 2102, with a grade of C or better. Electronic materials and devices with examples from crystalline and amorphous semiconductors, junction and MOS devices, thermoelectrics, lasers and super-conductors. Introduction to the quantum mechanics of electrons in solids, electron-atom interactions and energy band model, providing a basis for rationalizing a wide variety of electronic properties. (Technical Elective)
MEGR 3152. Mechanics and Materials Laboratory. (2)  Prerequisites: MEGR 2144, MEGR 3121, MEGR 3161 and MEGR 3171L, all with a grade of C or better. Laboratory experiments related to the areas of mechanics and materials engineering. Three hours of laboratory work per week. MEGR 3156. Design Projects Lab II. (2) Prerequisites: ECGR 2161, MEGR 2144, and MEGR 2156 all with a grade of C or better. Study of the process of design and reduction to practice of engineering concepts in a team environment. Requirements definition, concept synthesis, concept of evaluation, project planning and execution. MEGR 3161. Introduction to Engineering Materials. (3) Prerequisites: CHEM 1251, MATH 2171, and MEGR 2144 with a grade of C or better. Classifications of engineering materials. Introduction to property structure relationships. Ideal and defect atomic structures of solids with examples from metals, ceramics and polymers. Cold working and annealing effects. Phase equilibria in alloys; introduction to diffusional processes and transformation kinetics. MEGR 3162. Mechanical Behavior and Strengthening of Solids. (3) Prerequisite: MEGR 3161, with a grade of C or better. Mechanical properties of materials including elastic behavior, plastic flow, fracture, creep, fatigue, and elevated temperature effects. Correlation of properties with atomic and microscopic structure. Dislocation theory and its application to mechanical behavior and strengthening mechanisms. Alloy hardening effects; effects of processing and heat treatments. Applications in Fe-C alloys. (Technical Elective)
MEGR 3171. Introduction to Measurements and Instrumentation. (2) Prerequisite: ECGR 2161, with a grade of C or better. Corequisite: MEGR 3171L. Statistical analysis of experimental data, curve fitting. Operational amplifiers and signal conditioning techniques for remote monitoring. Computer data acquisition, interfaces and techniques, RS-232 and GPIB interface buses. Discussion of the principles involved in the use of sensors and transducers in measurements of linear and angular displacement, velocity and acceleration, temperature, force, pressure, torque and flow. Introduction to dynamic measurements and frequency analysis. MEGR 3171L. Instrumentation Laboratory. (2)  Prerequisite: PHYS 2102L with a grade of C or better. Corequisite: MEGR 3171. Utilization of measuring equipment targeted to mechanical engineering applications. Experiments will focus on the use of instrumentation and computer interfacing methods for the optimization of measurement processes. Basic programming of scientific instruments. MEGR 3210. Automotive Power Plants. (3) Prerequisite: MEGR 3112, with a grade of C or better. Energy analysis of internal and external combustion engines for vehicular propulsion. Thermodynamic principles for combustion efficient use of fuel combustion, different types of fuel use, and pollutant control. (Technical Elective)
MEGR 3211. Road Vehicle Dynamics. (3) Prerequisites: MEGR 3121 and MEGR 3122, both with a C or better. An introduction to road vehicle Dynamics. Acceleration and braking performance, road loads, steady-state cornering, suspension, steering system and tire behavior. (Technical Elective). MEGR 3212. Heat Convection and Compact Heat Exchanger Design. (3) Prerequisites: MEGR 3114 and MEGR 3116, both with a grade of C or better. Natural, forced internal and external heat convection, heat convection in phase change (boiling and condensation) and design of compact heat exchangers (Technical Elective)
MEGR 3214. Refrigeration and Air/Conditioning. (3) Prerequisites: MEGR 3112 and 3116, both with a grade of C or better. Thermodynamics and heat transfer applied to analysis, design of cooling/heating systems. (Technical Elective)
MEGR 3216. Thermal/Fluid Design. (3) Prerequisites: MEGR 3114 and 3116, both with a grade of C or better. Design of systems utilizing thermodynamic, heat transfer, and fluid flow principles. Topics include thermal system design, thermodynamic modeling, design applications with heat transfer, thermo-economic optimization of simple and complex systems. MEGR 3221. Machine Analysis and Design I. (3) Prerequisite: MEGR 3122 and MEGR 2144, both with a grade of C or better. Technical application of basic principles of mechanical science to analysis of machines and mechanical systems. Design of typical machine elements. Strength and deflection requirements. MEGR 3222. Machine Analysis and Design II. (3) Prerequisite: MEGR 3221, with a grade of C or better. Synthesis of machines and mechanical systems. Analysis, creative design and selection of machines and machine elements. (Technical Elective)
MEGR 3225. Introduction to Finite Element Analysis. (3) Prerequisites: MEGR 2144 and MEGR 3122, both with a grade of C or better. The basic concepts of finite element analysis (FEA) are introduced. The necessary concepts from linear algebra are reviewed. Simple elements such as truss and beam elements are emphasized, with an introduction to continuum elements for structural analysis. Introduction to heat transfer elements for steady state conduction and convection. Mathematics software is used to illustrate such concepts as the finite element assembly process, and the solution of the primary unknowns. A commercially available finite element code is also introduced. (Technical Elective)
MEGR 3251. Thermal/Fluids Laboratory. (2)  Prerequisites: MEGR 3111, MEGR 3114, and MEGR 3171L, all with a grade of C or better. Laboratory experiments related to the areas of thermodynamics, fluid mechanics, and heat transfer. Three hours of laboratory work per week. MEGR 3255. Senior Design I. (2) Prerequisite: MEGR 3156 and MEGR 3152 with a grade of C or better. Corequisite: MEGR 3251 and senior standing in mechanical engineering. First of a two-semester sequence leading to a major integrative experience in applying the principles of design and project management to the design of a major mechanical engineering system. Teamwork and communication skills are emphasized. MEGR 3256. Senior Design II. (2)  Prerequisite: MEGR 3255 with a grade of C or better. A continuation of MEGR 3255 including project execution leading to an oral presentation and final written report. MEGR 3281. Numerical Control of Manufacturing Processes. (3) Prerequisite: MEGR 2180. Fundamental theory and application of numerically controlled machine tools including design principles, elements of machine structure, control systems programming methods. Role of numerical control in flexible manufacturing systems. Two lectures and a two hour lab per week. (Technical Elective)
MEGR 3282. Statistical Process Control and Metrology. (3) Prerequisite: MEGR 2180 with a grade of C or better. Introduction to metrology. Measurement of size, form and surface texture. Introduction to quality control, control charts for attributes and variables, acceptance sampling. Process capability estimation and process control. (Technical Elective)
MEGR 3299. Professional Development. (1) An examination of various aspects of engineering as a profession. Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. MEGR 3355. Motorsports Engineering Clinic II. (2) Prerequisite: admission to Motorsports concentration, senior standing in mechanical engineering, MEGR 2299 and MEGR 3156, and MEGR 3152 all with a grade of C or better. Corequisite: MEGR 3251. First of a two-semester sequence leading to a major integrative experience in applying the principles of design and project management to the design of an automotive engineering system. Teamwork and communication skills are emphasized. An examination of various aspects of automotive and motorsports engineering presented by faculty and industry representatives. MEGR 3356. Motorsports Engineering Clinic III. (2)  Prerequisite: admission to Motorsports concentration and MEGR 3355 with a grade of C or better. A continuation of MEGR 3355 including project execution, project reporting and leading to an oral presentation and a final written report. An examination of various aspects of automotive and motorsports engineering presented by faculty and industry representative. MEGR 3695. Mechanical Engineering Cooperative Education Seminar. (1) Required of Co-op students during semesters immediately following each work assignment for presentation of engineering reports on work done the prior semester. MEGR 3890. Individualized Study. (1-3) Prerequisite: permission of the department. Supervised individual study within an area of a student’s particular interest which is beyond the scope of existing courses. May be repeated for credit. (Technical Elective)
MEGR 3990. Undergraduate Research. (1-4) Prerequisite: Permission of the department. Independent study of a theoretical and/or experimental problem in a specialized area of mechanical engineering. Topics originate from the student or the faculty member supervising the study. May be repeated for credit. (Technical Elective)
MEGR 4112. Intermediate Fluid Mechanics and Vehicle Aerodynamics. (3) Prerequisites: MEGR 3111 and 3114, both with a grade of C or better. Technical elective. A continuation of MEGR 3114. Topics include flow over body surfaces, lift and drag, boundary layers, ground effect, potential flow theory and compressible flow. Application of aerodynamics to ground vehicles and its effect on vehicle performance and handling. (Technical Elective)
MEGR 4113. Energy Conversion I. (3) Prerequisites: MEGR 3112 and MEGR 3114, both with a grade of C or better. Application of principles of thermodynamics, fluid flow and heat transfer to internal combustion engines, compressors, turbines, heat exchanges, refrigeration, and cryogenics. (Technical Elective)
MEGR 4127. Introduction to Robotics. (3) Prerequisites: Senior standing in ME department. Modeling of industrial robots, homogeneous transformations, static forces, kinematics, velocities, dynamics, computer animation of dynamic models, motion trajectory planning, and introduction to vision, sensors and actuators. (Technical Elective)
MEGR 4131. Solid State Transformations. (3) Prerequisite: MEGR 3161 with a grade of C or better. Thermodynamics, morphology and kinetics of solid state transformations. Diffusion and absolute reaction rate theory; crystallographic nature of phase transformations; nucleation and growth processes; precipitation and oxidation reaction. (Technical Elective)
MEGR 4143. Discrete Mechanical Vibrating Systems. (3) Prerequisites: MEGR 3122 with a grade of C or better. Free and forced vibrations of lumped parameter systems with multi-degrees of freedom. Topics include transient and steady state response, determination of natural frequencies and mode shapes with and without damping. Introduction to principal coordinates and matrix iteration techniques. (Technical Elective)
MEGR 4144. Intermediate Dynamics. (3) Prerequisites: MEGR 3121 and MATH 2171, both with a grade of C or better. Further studies in dynamics of particles and rigid bodies, with engineering applications. Introduction to Lagrange’s equations of motion. Multi-degree-of-freedom vibrations. (Technical Elective)
MEGR 4162. Materials Production and Process. (3) Prerequisites: MEGR 3161, with a grade of C or better, and permission of instructor. Applications of thermodynamics and chemistry to extractive process metallurgy. Fundamental principles of materials forming operations. Casting, mechanical working and joining methods. (Technical Elective)
MEGR 4165. Introduction to Nondestructive Evaluation Methods. (3) Prerequisite: MEGR 3161, with a grade of C or better. Nondestructive evaluation principles and techniques, including liquid penetrate, magnetic particle, acoustic emission, ultrasound, radiography and eddy currents. (Technical Elective)
METR 3140. Introduction to Meteorology & Climatology. (3) Prerequisite ESCI 1101-1101L or permission of instructor. Fundamental physical principles of weather and climate. Analysis of short and long term atmospheric behavior are introduced. Topics include solar radiation, temperature, moisture, wind and pressure, synoptic systems, regional climates, paleoclimates, climatic change, and applied climatology. (Fall)
METR 3210. Atmospheric Thermodynamics. (3) Prerequisite: METR 3140, or permission of instructor. The study of the physical processes associated with atmospheric thermodynamics and stability. Topics include: atmospheric composition, the equation of state, hydrostatics, the first and second laws of thermodynamics for dry, moist, and saturated air, atmospheric stability, parcel buoyancy, and thermodynamic diagrams. Three hours of lecture per week. (Spring, On demand)
METR 3220. Physical Meteorology. (3) Prerequisite: METR 3140. Properties of aerosols and clouds, cloud nucleation and precipitation processes, and atmospheric electricity. Introduction to radar meteorology. Three hours of lecture per week. (Spring)
METR 3240. Boundary-Layer Meteorology. (4) Prerequisites: METR 3140, MATH 1241, or permission of instructor. Examines the flows of energy, water, and gases within the planetary boundary layer and the exchange of energy and mass at the earth’s surface. Theories of interactions within the boundary-layer. Three hours of lecture and one three-hour lab per week. (Spring)
METR 3245. Synoptic Meteorology. (4) Prerequisite: METR, 3140, MATH 1241, or permission of instructor. An extension of ESCI 3250 to include atmospheric modeling, analysis of air mass structure, synoptic analysis with quantitative forecasting techniques, severe storm characteristics, wind shear, boundary-layer meteorology, and techniques for differentiating climatic regime traits and analysis of their variation through time. Three hours of lecture and one three-hour lab per week. (Fall)
METR 3250. Dynamic Meteorology. (4) Prerequisites: METR 3140, MATH 1241, or permission of instructor. In-depth examination of atmospheric dynamics, including horizontal flow in the atmosphere, characteristics of fluid flow applied to the atmosphere, and general circulation models. Three hours of lecture, three hours of lab, per week. (Spring)
METR 3252. Weather Analysis Laboratory. (1) Prerequisite or corequisite: METR 3245 and permission of instructor. Weather observation, meteorologic data collection and analysis, and techniques of weather forecasting. May be repeated for credit. (On demand)
METR 3330. Weather Forecasting. (3) Prerequisite: METR 3245, or permission of instructor. This course will focus on weather forecasting: real-time, short-term, and long-term. Verification techniques will be studied. Three hours of lecture per week. (Spring, On demand)
METR 3340. Weather Communications. (3) Prerequisite: METR 3245, or permission of instructor. A survey of the field of weather communications covering weather forecasting principles, television and radio broadcasting, science writing, forensic meteorology, and forecasting for business applications. Three hours of lecture per week. (Fall, On demand)
METR 4000. Selected Topics in Meteorology. (1-4) Prerequisites: METR 3140 or permission of the instructor. In-depth treatment of specific topics selected from meteorology. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (On demand)
METR 4150. Applied Climatology. (3)  Prerequisite: METR 3250 or permission of instructor. Methods of acquiring and analyzing climactic data in various types of applied problems. Emphasis on methods to assess and reduce the impact of weather and climate upon human activities. (Spring)
METR 4245. Advanced Synoptic Meteorology. (3) Prerequisites: METR 3245, METR 3250. An extension of METR 3245 sufficient to develop an integrated view of dynamic and synoptic meteorology. Included are a survey of conceptual models and analysis techniques for mesoscale atmospheric features, cumulus convection, and tropical storms. Three hours of lecture per week. (Spring, On demand)
METR 4250. Advanced Dynamic Meteorology. (3) Prerequisites: METR 3245, METR 3250, or permission of instructor. In-depth examination of atmospheric dynamics, focusing on the structure and evolution of synoptic scale dynamical and convective weather systems, and atmospheric modeling. Three hours of lecture per week. (Fall, On demand)
METR 4320. Tropical Meteorology. (3) Prerequisites: METR 3245 and METR 3250, or permission of instructor. A comprehensive study of the tropical atmosphere, including climatology, mean structure and circulation, air-sea energy exchange, cumulus transport, synoptic waves, and tropical storms. Special attention is paid to the formation, evolution, motion, and societal impacts of hurricanes. Three hours of lecture per week. (Fall, On demand)
METR 4350. Mesoscale Meteorology. (3) Prerequisites: METR 3245 and METR 3250, or permission of instructor. A comprehensive study of the structure, evolution, and dynamics of atmospheric phenomena having spatial scales between 2 and 200 km. Topics include: fronts, convective initiation, mesoscale convective systems, severe thunderstorms, tornadoes, low-level jets, land-sea breezes, and terrain effects. Three hours of lecture per week. (Spring, On demand)
METR 4400. Internship in Meteorology. (3-6) Prerequisite: Permission of the department. Research and/or work experience designed to be a logical extension of a student’s academic program. The student must apply to department for an internship by submitting a proposal which specifies the type of work/research experience preferred and how the internship will complement his or her academic program. The department will attempt to place the selected students in cooperating community organizations to complete specified research or workrelated tasks which are based on a contractual arrangement between the student and community organization. The student can receive three to six hours credit, depending on the nature and extent of the internship assignment. (On demand)
METR 4800. Individual Study in Meteorology. (1-4) Prerequisite: Permission from the department and credit hours established in advance. Tutorial study or special research problems. The student must request permission for independent study from an individual faculty member. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (On demand)
MGMT 1140. Introduction to Business. (3) Prerequisite: less than 45 hours earned. Fundamentals of business including marketing, management, production, accounting, finance, economics, information systems and other business areas. A general elective course that does not satisfy a requirement for any concentration or major in The Belk College of Business. (On demand)
MGMT 3000. Topics in Management. (3) Prerequisite: junior standing. Topics from the area of Management and Administration. The course may be repeated for credit. (On demand)
MGMT 3140. Management and Organizational Behavior. (3) Prerequisites: ACCT 2121, 2122; ECON 2101, 2102, INFO 2130; junior standing. A study of the role of manager with an emphasis on understanding the behavioral and administrative theories and concepts needed to succeed in contemporary organizations. Topics covered in the course include motivation, leadership, managing teams, and teamwork. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
MGMT 3160. Business Communications. (3) (W, O) Prerequisite: INFO 2130, junior standing. The nature and problems of individual, interpersonal and organizational communication in business. Various verbal techniques such as business presentations and writing will be developed and practiced for effective organizational and individual performance. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
MGMT 3241. Human Resource Management. (3) Prerequisite: MGMT 3140 with a C or better. The study of effectively selecting, utilizing, assessing and developing managers as well as the role of the Human Resource department in administering human resources in a changing and demanding environment. Experience in developing and utilizing behavioral science research methods to assess effectiveness. (Fall, Spring) (Evenings)
MGMT 3243. Employment Law. (3) Cross-listed as ECON 3107. Prerequisite: MGMT 3140 with a C or better. This course examines the legislation which impacts human resource management practices in union and non-union settings. Topics covered include fair employment practices, anti-discrimination law, representation elections, unfair labor practices, compensation and benefit legislation, privacy concerns and dispute settlement processes. (Fall, Spring) (Evenings)
MGMT 3260. Managerial Communication. (3) Prerequisites: MGMT 3140 with a C or better and MGMT 3160. An examination of the roles of communication networks and strategies in managerial decision making. Emphasis on the role of the communication skills in managing change, organizational conflict, and corporate cultures. Cases will be used to analyze and address specific management problems. (Fall, Spring)
MGMT 3274. International Business Processes and Problems. (3) Prerequisite: MGMT 3140 with a C or better. Management Majors and International Business Majors. Junior standing. An introduction to the process, institutions and problems associated with exporting, importing and management of multinational businesses. (Fall)
MGMT 3275. International Management. (3) Prerequisites: MGMT 3140 with a C or better, MGMT 3274 and senior standing. Preparation for effective management in a world characterized by intense international competition. Case studies, projects, and presentations assist students to apply concepts and theories. (Spring)
MGMT 3277. Entrepreneurship. (3) Prerequisites: MGMT 3140 with a C or better. Review of the processes by which continuous and discontinuous innovations are developed into intellectual property and then utilized as the basis for intellectual property commercialization. Cognitive aspects of innovation and creativity are covered as well as issues with patents, copyrights, trademarks, and intellectual property protection. The course presents a commercialization model by which innovations are developed into commercial products. (Fall, Spring)
MGMT 3280. Business Policy. (3) Prerequisites: Senior standing and completion of ECON 3125, OPER 3100, MKTG 3110, FINN 3120, BLAW 3150, MGMT 3140 with a C or better and MGMT 3160. (Accounting majors are required to take OPER 3100, MKTG 3110, FINN 3120, MGMT 3140, BLAW 3150, and either MGMT 3160 or COMM 1101.) Concerns the role of top management of the firm in integrating internal functions and environmental forces. Emphasis on defining economic, technological, ethical, political and social factors affecting the firm and their consideration in setting goals and operating policies. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
MGMT 3282. Managerial Ethics. (3) Prerequisites: MKTG 3110, MGMT 3140 with a C or better and BLAW 3150. A study of the impact of management decisions on customers, employees, creditors, shareholders, community interests, ecology, and government (including taxes and the regulatory environment). The objective is to provide future managers with a systematic way of analyzing the impact of management decisions on larger society. (Fall, Spring)
MGMT 3287. Managerial Leadership. (3) Prerequisite: MGMT 3140 and 3241 with a C or better; completion of any 2 MGMT electives, plus permission of the department. This capstone course for the management major provides a managerial perspective on leadership in formal organizations. Emphasis is placed on team-building, exercising influence, decision-making, and conflict management. Pedagogical tools to be used include role playing, case analyses, self-assessment of leadership competencies, and shadowing of working managers. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
MGMT 3500. Cooperative Education and 49ership Experience. (0) Enrollment in this course is required for the department's cooperative education and 49ership students during each semester they are working in a position. This course is restricted to majors in the department of Management. Acceptance into the Experiential Learning Program by the University Career Center is required. Participating students pay a course registration fee for transcript notation (49ership and co-op) and receive full-time student status (co-op only). Assignments must be arranged and approved in advance. Course may be repeated; evaluation is Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory. Only open to undergraduate students; Graduate level students are encouraged to contact their academic departments to inquire about academic or industrial internship options for credit. For more information, contact the University Career Center. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
MGMT 3800. Directed Study. (1-6) Prerequisites: Permission of the department and junior standing. Enrollment granted only by permission of the faculty with whom the work will be performed. The student's work assignments will be designed by the student and faculty member who will oversee the project of study. The credit hours will be determined prior to enrollment and will be based on the particular project undertaken. (On demand)
MKTG 3000. Topics in Marketing. (3) Prerequisites: MKTG 3110 with a C or better, or permission of the department. Topics from the area of marketing. This course may be repeated for credit as topics vary. (On demand)
MKTG 3110. Marketing Concepts. (3) Prerequisites for College of Business majors: ACCT 2121 and 2122 with a C or better, ECON 1201 and 1202 with a C or better, INFO 2130 or College Micro Computer Proficiency Test with a C or better, junior standing. Designed to acquaint the student with the marketing concept, various aspects of the marketing-external environment interface, and interrelatedness with other functional areas. Provides marketing majors with a foundation for further study, while offering nonmarketing majors a survey of marketing's function in business organizations. (Fall,. Spring, Summer)
MKTG 3210. Marketing Research and Analysis. (3) Prerequisites: MKTG 3110 with a C or better, STAT 1220. An applications course that covers the entire research process including problem identification, secondary and primary data collection, scaling techniques, questionnaire design, reliability and validity, experimental design, sampling, data analysis, and data communication. (Spring)
MKTG 3211. Advertising and Promotions Management. (3) Prerequisites: MKTG 3110 with a C or better. Covers all areas of marketing promotion, including such topics as advertising, media selection, packaging and sales promotion. Offers basic skills and techniques to allow the student to enter careers in advertising or media. (Fall ,Spring)
MKTG 3212. Retailing Management. (3) Prerequisite: MKTG 3110 with a C or better. Presents retailing as a part of the marketing distribution phase of a total interactive marketing system. Key concepts include consumer and market analysis, store location, store layout, merchandising, pricing and promotional issues and problems. Also considers legal and environmental implications. Emphasis on application of class concepts through class discussion and assignments. (Fall, Spring)
MKTG 3213. Professional Selling and Sales Management. (3) Prerequisite: MKTG 3110 with a C or better. An overview of skills and knowledge involved in individual selling and management of sales programs. Emphasis on sales and sales management theories and their applications. (Fall, Spring)
MKTG 3214. Internet Marketing. (3) Prerequisites: MKTG 3110 with a C or better, INFO 2130 or College Micro Computer Proficiency Test with a C or better. Emphasis on developing successful Internet marketing strategy based on quantitative and qualitative analysis of customer, competitors and channel members. Incorporates online and offline communication media and hands-on experience with Internet applications. (Fall)
MKTG 3215. Global Marketing Management. (3) Prerequisites: MKTG 3110 with a C or better. A course that assesses global market opportunities, develops global market strategies, and implements global market plans. Major topics covered include examining cultural, social, legal, political, financial, and geographical environments. The marketing mix elements are studied in the global environment. (Fall, Spring)
MKTG 3216. Consumer Behavior. (3) Prerequisite: MKTG 3110 with a C or better. Examination of consumer decision-making processes in the purchase, usage and disposal of goods, services and ideas. Emphasis on understanding consumption-related behaviors and the development and evaluation of marketing strategies intended to influence those behaviors. Particular focus on managing changes in consumption behavior. (Fall, Spring)
MKTG 3219. Marketing Strategy. (3) Prerequisites: MKTG 3110 with a C or better, completion of at least three marketing elective courses, and senior standing. Integration of all marketing elements in a strategic planning framework. Emphasis on areas of strategic importance, especially those which have significant implications and relevance for marketing policy decisions in competitive situations. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
MKTG 3220. Sports Marketing. (3) Prerequisite: MKTG 3110 with a grade of C or better. The course will explore the strategies necessary for success in marketing sports events, products and services. The course will build knowledge, skills, and practical understanding of the nature, contexts and dynamics of sports marketing and critically explore the product, pricing, promotion, and distribution – the strategies – available to sports and sports-related businesses. (Fall)
MKTG 3400. Marketing Internship. (3) Prerequisites: Junior and senior marketing majors in good standing, with the completion of MKTG 3110 with a C or better, plus two Marketing electives. Requires permission of the department. Provides a meaningful work experience in a field of marketing. Requires 150 hours of supervised employment, 50 hours per credit hour. Internship proposals can be initiated by the student or by the department. Student should consult the department chair well in advance of registration to discuss availability of positions. Proposal forms must be completed and approved prior to registration. Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. Cannot be repeated for credit or taken for credit at the same time or following any other internship for credit. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
MKTG 3500. Cooperative Education and 49ership Experience. (0) Enrollment in this course is required for the department's cooperative education and 49ership students during each semester they are working in a position. This course is restricted to majors in the department of Marketing. Acceptance into the Experiential Learning Program by the University Career Center is required. Participating students pay a course registration fee for transcript notation (49ership and co-op) and receive full-time student status (co-op only). Assignments must be arranged and approved in advance. Course may be repeated; evaluation is Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory. Only open to undergraduate students; Graduate level students are encouraged to contact their academic departments to inquire about academic or industrial internship options for credit. For more information, contact the University Career Center. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
MKTG 3800. Directed Study. (1-3) Prerequisites: Permission of the department and junior standing. Enrollment granted only by permission of the faculty with whom the work will be performed. The student's work assignments will be designed by the student and faculty member who will oversee the project of study. The credit hours will be determined prior to enrollment and will be based on the particular project undertaken. The proposal must be approved by the department chair. (On demand)
MSCI 1101. Leadership and Personal Development. (1) Corequisite: MSCI 1101L. Introduces cadets to the personal challenges and competencies that are critical for effective leadership. Cadets learn how the personal development of life skills such as critical thinking, goal setting, time management, physical fitness, and stress management relate to leadership, officership, and the Army profession. Includes instruction in map reading, land navigation, and customs and courtesies of the Army. Notes: Participation in leadership lab is required. There is no military obligation to take this course, open to all UNC Charlotte students. (Fall MSCI 1101L. Leadership and Personal Development Lab. (1) Application of Basic Leadership Skills through multiple venues including Drill and Ceremony, Land Navigation, Weapons Familiarization, Basic Rifle Marksmanship, Medical Tasks, Individual Movement Techniques, Employing Claymore Mines, Engaging Target with Hand Grenades, Introduction to the Orders Process, Understanding Army Acronyms, Hand and Arm Signals, and Radio Protocol Procedures. (Fall)
MSCI 1102. Introduction to Leadership. (1) Corequisite: MSCI 1102L. Overview of Leadership fundamentals such as setting direction, problemsolving, listening, presenting briefs, providing feedback, and using effective writing skills. Cadets explore dimensions of leadership values, attributes, skills, and actions in the context of practical, handson, and interactive exercises. Includes instruction in basic tactics. Notes: Participation in leadership lab is required. There is no military obligation to take this course, open to all UNC Charlotte students. (Spring)
MSCI 1102L. Introduction to Leadership Lab. (1) Application of Basic Leadership Skills through multiple venues including Drill and Ceremony, Land Navigation, Weapons Familiarization, Basic Rifle Marksmanship, Medical Tasks, Individual Movement Techniques, Employing Claymore Mines, Engaging Target with Hand Grenades, Introduction to the Orders Process, Understanding Army Acronyms, Hand and Arm Signals, and Radio Protocol Procedures. (Spring)
MSCI 2101. Innovative Team Leadership. (2) Corequisite: MSCI 2101L. Explores the dimensions of creative and innovative tactical leadership strategies and styles by examining team dynamics and two historical leadership theories that form the basis of the Army leadership framework (trait and behavior theories.) Cadets practice aspects of personal motivation and team building in the context of planning, executing, and assessing team exercises and participating in leadership labs. Includes instruction in troop leading procedures, tactical movement, battle drills, and offensive and defensive operations. Notes: Participation in leadership lab is required. There is no military obligation to take this course, open to all UNC Charlotte students. (Fall)
MSCI 2101L. Innovative Team Leadership Lab. (1) Application of Intermediate Leadership Skills through multiple venues including Leading Drill and Ceremony, Advanced Land Navigation, Building Terrain Models, Advanced Rifle Marksmanship, Advanced Medical Tasks, Movement Formations, Movement Techniques, Special Teams, Writing Operations Orders, Situation Reporting, Call for Fire, and Introduction to Battle Drills. (Fall)
MSCI 2102. Foundations of Tactical Leadership. (1) Corequisite: MSCI 2102L. Examines the challenges of leading tactical teams in the complex contemporary operating environment (COE). The course highlights dimensions of terrain analysis, patrolling, and operation orders. Further study of the theoretical basis of the Army leadership framework explores the dynamics of adaptive leadership in the context of military operations. Includes instruction in terrain analysis, patrolling, tactical orders, route planning, and navigational methods. Notes: Participation in leadership lab is required. There is no military obligation to take this course, open to all UNC Charlotte students. (Spring)
MSCI 2102L. Foundations of Tactical Leadership Lab. (1) Application of Intermediate Leadership Skills through multiple venues including Leading Drill and Ceremony, Advanced Land Navigation, Building Terrain Models, Advanced Rifle Marksmanship, Advanced Medical Tasks, Movement Formations, Movement Techniques, Special Teams, Writing Operations Orders, Situation Reporting, Call for Fire, and Introduction to Battle Drills. (Spring)
MSCI 3101. Adaptive Team Leadership. (3) Prerequisite: Basic Course Credit. Corequisite: MSCI 3102L. Challenges cadets to study, practice, and evaluate adaptive leadership skills as they are presented with challenging scenarios related to squad tactical operations. Cadets receive systematic and specific feedback on their leadership attributes and actions. Based on such feedback, as well as their own self-evaluations, cadets continue to develop their leadership and critical thinking abilities. Includes instruction in squad operations, problem solving, and combat orders. Note: Participation in leadership lab is required. (Fall)
MSCI 3101L. Adaptive Team Leadership Lab. (1) Challenging scenarios related to small-unit tactical operations are used to develop self awareness and critical thinking skills. The cadet will receive systematic and specific feedback on leadership abilities. Cadets at this level serve as the NCO Corps of the ROTC Battalion; the backbone and executors of the program. MSCI 3102. Applied Team Leadership.. (3) Prerequisite: MSCI 3101. Corequisite: MSCI 2102L. Uses increasingly intense situational leadership challenges to build cadet awareness and skills in leading tactical operations up to platoon level. Cadets review aspects of combat, stability, and support operations. They also conduct military briefings and develop proficiency in garrison operation orders. Includes instruction in platoon operations, stability and support operations, and garrison orders. Designed to prepare third-year students to perform effectively at the Leadership Development and Assessment Course (LDAC). Note: Participation in leadership lab is required. (Spring)
MSCI 3102L. Applied Team Leadership Lab. (1) Specific instruction is given in individual leader development, planning and execution of small-unit operations, individual and team development, and the Army as a career choice. Prepares cadets for the mandatory 32-day Leader Development and Assessment Course at Fort Lewis, Wash. MSCI 4101. Developing Adaptive Leaders. (3) Prerequisite: MSCI 3101 and 3102. Corequisite: MSCI 4101L. Develops cadet proficiency in planning, executing, and assessing complex operations, functioning as a member of a staff, and providing performance feedback to subordinates. Cadets assess risk, make ethical decisions, and lead fellow ROTC cadets. Lessons on military justice and personnel processes prepare cadets to make the transition to Army officers. Includes instruction in risk management, training management, code of conduct, rules of engagement, counseling and evaluations. Notes: Participation in leadership lab is required. Mandatory for all senior ROTC students. (Fall)
MSCI 4101L. Developing Adaptive Leaders Lab. (1) Students will lead cadets at lower levels. Leadership experiences are designed to prepare them for their first military unit of assignment. Identify responsibilities of key staff members, coordinate staff roles amongst twelve separate universities and colleges that make up the ROTC battalion, and use battalion field/garrison situations to teach, train, and develop subordinates. MSCI 4102. Leadership in a Complex World. (3) Prerequisite: MSCI 4101. Corequisite: MSCI 4102L. Explores the dynamics of leading in the complex situations of current military operations in the contemporary operating environment (COE). Cadets examine differences in customs and courtesies, military law, principles of war, and rules of engagement in the face of international terrorism. They also explore aspects of interacting with nongovernment organizations, civilians on the battlefield, and host nation support. Includes instruction in Army organization and modularity, the platoon command team, a battle analysis, and a staff ride. Notes: Participation in leadership lab is required. Mandatory for all senior ROTC students. MSCI 4102L. Leadership in a Complex World Lab. (1) Designed to prepare for first military unit of assignment. Students will identify responsibilities of key staff members, coordinate staff roles amongst twelve separate universities and colleges that make up the ROTC battalion, and use battalion field/garrison situations to teach, train, and develop subordinates. The leadership lab uses case studies, scenarios, and “What Now, Lieutenant?” exercises to prepare students to face the complex ethical and practical demands of leading as a commissioned officer in the United States Army. MUSIC EDUCATION (MUED) MUED 2100. Introduction to Music Education. (2) Introduction to the organization and various types/levels of music education. Overview of the ethical, legal, and instructional issues related to diversity in the classroom. Field-based activities in observing music classroom settings: 5 hours. (Spring)
MUED 2200. Foundations of Music Education. (2) Prerequisite: permission of the instructor. Introduction to the social, historical, and philosophical foundations of music education, major issues in American education, music education research, and instruction planning in music education. Field-based activities in observing music classroom settings: 5 hours. (Fall)
MUED 4141. Music Development and Learning. (2) Prerequisite: acceptance into the Professional Music Education track. This course if for all music education majors and is designed to provide foundational skills for music teaching in grades K-12, regardless of specialization. Students will approach the teaching of music through various perspectives of developmental and learning theory, music acquisition and learning theory, and different approaches to the teaching of musical concepts and skills. Students will address their own philosophies of music education and will develop lesson planning strategies based on those philosophies guided by the National and North Carolina Standards for the Arts. Students will also explore reading instruction within the music curriculum. A minimum of five hours of field experience through observation is required. (Spring)
MUED 4190. Secondary Choral Methods. (2) Prerequisite: MUED 4141, MUSC 3135 and MUSC 4137. Corequisite: MUED 4190L. Rehearsal techniques, repertoire, and administration of junior and senior high school choral groups. Three contact hours. (Fall)
MUED 4190L. Choral Methods Lab. (1) Prerequisites: acceptance into the Professional Music Education track and permission of instructor. May be repeated for credit. Application of rehearsal methods with collegiate and public school choral ensembles. 10 hours of additional outside fieldwork required. Three contact hours. (Fall)
MUED 4192. General Music Methods and Materials K-12. (3) Prerequisite: MUED 4141. This course is designed for the general music specialist. The course includes general music methods and materials for elementary grades through high school. The primary focus will be on elementary school general music but will extend into teaching general music and nonperformance based music courses in grades 6 through 12. Students will experience applications of Gordon’s Music Learning Theory, and the approaches of Orff, Kodaly and Jacques-Dalcroze. Current school music theories and materials will also be explored and discussed. A minimum of ten hours of field experience is required through observation and teaching. (Fall)
MUED 4194. Elementary Instrumental Methods. (2) Prerequisite: MUED 4141. Study and analysis through individual evaluation and in-class group performance of current elementary instrumental method books and teaching strategies. Field work required. Three contact hours. (Fall)
MUED 4195. Secondary Instrumental Methods. (2) Prerequisite: MUED 4141. Musical, organizational, and administrative aspects of teaching junior and senior high school bands and orchestras. Field work required. Three contact hours. (Spring)
MUED 4270. Teaching Discipline: Assessment & Behavior in the Music Classroom. (2) Prerequisite: MUED 4141. This class guides students in developing specific methods that address unique discipline, teaching, and assessment concerns inherent in a music classroom. Students will develop specific techniques in the quantitative study and assessment of music behavior. (Fall)
MUED 4467. Student Teaching/Seminar: K-12 Music. (15) Prerequisite: approved application for student teaching. A planned sequence of experiences in the student’s area of specialization conducted in an approved school setting under the supervision and coordination of a University supervisor and a cooperating teacher in which the student demonstrates the competencies identified for his/her specific teaching field in an appropriate grade level setting. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1040. Applied Music for Minors. Courses consist of private instruction, a half-hour lesson per week or an hour lesson every two weeks (1). Minimum of a half-hour practice per day per credit hour. May be repeated for credit. Students must sign up for a large ensemble (MUPF 1110, MUPF 1112, MUPF 1113, MUPF 1120, or MUPF 1121) concurrently. MUPF 1040. Applied Music for Minors: Euphonium. (1) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music minor or permission of instructor. Corequisite: MUPF 1112 or MUPF 1113. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1041. Applied Music for Minors: Trumpet. (1) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music minor or permission of instructor. Corequisite: MUPF 1112 or MUPF 1113. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1042. Applied Music for Minors: French Horn. (1) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music minor or permission of instructor. Corequisite: MUPF 1112 or MUPF 1113. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1043. Applied Music for Minors: Trombone. (1) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music minor or permission of instructor. Corequisite: MUPF 1112 or MUPF 1113. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1044. Applied Music for Minors: Tuba. (1) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music minor or permission of instructor. Corequisite: MUPF 1112 or MUPF 1113. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1045. Applied Music for Minors: Guitar. (1) Prerequisite: acceptance of a music minor or permission of instructor. Corequisite: MUPF 1115. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1046. Applied Music for Minors: Harp. (1) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music minor or permission of instructor. Corequisite: MUPF 1110, MUPF 1112 or MUPF 1113. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1047. Applied Music for Minors: Organ. (1) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music minor or permission of instructor. Corequisite: MUPF 1110, MUPF 1112, MUPF 1113, MUPF 1120, or MUPF 1121. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1048. Applied Music for Minors: Piano. (1) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music minor or permission of instructor. Corequisite: MUPF 1110, MUPF 1112 or MUPF 1113, MUPF 1120, or MUPF 1121. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1049. Applied Music for Minors: Violin. (1) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music minor or permission of instructor. Corequisite: MUPF 1110. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1050. Applied Music for Minors: Viola. (1) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music minor or permission of instructor. Corequisite: MUPF 1110. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1051. Applied Music for Minors: Cello. (1) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music minor or permission of instructor. Corequisite: MUPF 1110. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1052. Applied Music for Minors: Bass. (1) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music minor or permission of instructor. Corequisite: MUPF 1110. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1053. Applied Music for Minors: Voice. (1) Prerequisite: acceptance of a music minor or permission of instructor. Corequisite: MUPF 1120 or MUPF 1121. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1054. Applied Music for Minors: Flute. (1) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music minor or permission of instructor. Corequisite: MUPF 1112 or MUPF 1113. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1055. Applied Music for Minors: Clarinet. (1) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music minor or permission of instructor. Corequisite: MUPF 1112 or MUPF 1113. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1056. Applied Music for Minors: Saxophone. (1) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music minor or permission of instructor. Corequisite: MUPF 1112 or MUPF 1113. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1057. Applied Music for Minors: Oboe. (1) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music minor or permission of instructor. Corequisite: MUPF 1112 or MUPF 1113. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1058. Applied Music for Minors: Bassoon. (1) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music minor or permission of instructor. Corequisite: MUPF 1112 or MUPF 1113. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1059. Applied Music for Minors: Percussion. (1) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music minor or permission of instructor. Corequisites: MUPF 1112 or MUPF 1113. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1110. Orchestra. (1) A performing ensemble. May be repeated for credit. Three contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1111. Jazz Ensemble. (1) Prerequisite: audition. Corequisite: MUPF 1111L. An ensemble specializing in performance and study of music composed for standard “big band” instrumentation. Performs music styles from the Swing era to present day. May be repeated for credit. Three contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1111L. Jazz Ensemble Sectional Rehearsals. (0) Corequisite: MUPF 1111. Sectional rehearsals for MUPF 1111. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1112. Symphonic Wind Ensemble. (1) Prerequisite. Audition. Corequisite: MUPF 1112L. A performing ensemble open to advanced wind and percussion players from any major. Performs traditional and contemporary band literature in concerts twice each semester. Occasional concert tours and performances for important regional music events. May be repeated for credit. Three contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1112L. Symphonic Wind Ensemble Sectional Rehearsals. (0) Corequisite: MUPF 1112. Sectional rehearsals for MUPF 1112. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1113. Concert Band. (1) A performing ensemble open to all students and members of the community with experience playing wind and percussion instruments. No formal audition required, only a simple hearing to determine part placement. Performs traditional and contemporary band literature in concerts twice each semester. May be repeated for credit. Two contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1114. Basketball Band. (1) Prerequisite: permission of instructor. A performing ensemble for University athletic contests and other campus events. May be repeated for credit. Three contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1115. Guitar Ensemble. (1) Prerequisite: permission of instructor. A performing ensemble. May be repeated for credit. Three contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1118. Chamber Music Ensembles. (1) Prerequisite: Permission of instructor. Performance by small groups of specific works. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1119. Special Instrumental Ensemble. (1) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music major and permission of instructor. An alternative to traditional ensembles listed above for students with specialized performance interests. May be repeated for credit. Three contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1120. University Chorale. (1) Prerequisite: permission of the instructor and completion of MUSC 1101, MUPF 1122, or MUPF 1123. Corequisite: MUPF 1120L. A mixed chorus that performs music of many styles from the Baroque period to the present. The enrollment ranges from 46 to 58 voices. Open to all UNC Charlotte students with extensive choral experience. May be repeated for credit. Three contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1121. Chamber Singers. (1) Prerequisite: audition. A highly-select mixed ensemble that ranges in size from 15 to 26 voices. This ensemble specializes in virtuosic literature from the Renaissance, Early Baroque, and Contemporary periods. Open to all UNC Charlotte students. A fullyear commitment is expected. May be repeated for credit. Three contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1122. Men’s Chorus (Mallard Creek Chorale). (1) The Mallard Creek Chorale is a popular performing ensemble for men in the glee tradition. It draws upon majors from across campus and performs several times each semester – including occasionally performing off campus and at athletic events. The ensemble performs folk, spirituals, Broadway, patriotic, barbershop, du-wop, and other musical styles traditional for men’s choruses. This ensemble is open to all male UNC Charlotte students with an interest in singing. Special emphasis is placed on building vocal technique and sight singing ability. May be repeated for credit. Three contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1123. Women’s Glee (Charlotteans). (1) The Charlotteans is open to all female UNC Charlotte students with an interest in singing. This ensemble performs a vast array of music from Renaissance through contemporary composers. Emphasis is placed on building vocal technique and sight singing ability. May be repeated for credit. Three contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1124. Opera Workshop. (1) Prerequisite: audition. Performance of scenes, acts, and entire operas. May be repeated for credit. Three contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1128. Special Vocal Ensemble. (1) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music major and permission of instructor. An alternative to the traditional ensembles listed above for students with specialized experience. Enrollment restricted to music majors. May be repeated for credit. Three contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1132. Woodwind Quintet. (1) Prerequisite: Permission of instructor. A performing ensemble that focuses on the woodwind quintet repertoire. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1133. Flute Quartet. (1) Prerequisite: Permission of instructor. A performing ensemble that focuses on the flute quartet repertoire. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1134. Flute Choir. (1) Prerequisite: Permission of instructor. A performing ensemble that focuses on the flute choir repertoire. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1137. Saxophone Quartet. (1) Prerequisite: Permission of instructor. A performing ensemble that focuses on the saxophone quartet repertoire. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1139. Woodwind Chamber Music. (1) Prerequisite: Permission of instructor. A performing ensemble that focuses on the woodwind chamber music repertoire. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1142. Brass Quintet. (1) Prerequisite: Permission of instructor. A performing ensemble that focuses on the brass quintet repertoire. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1146. Tuba/Euphonium Ensemble. (1) Prerequisite: Permission of instructor. A performing ensemble that focuses on the tuba/euphonium repertoire. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1149. Brass Chamber Music. (1) Prerequisite: Permission of instructor. A performing ensemble that focuses on the brass chamber music repertoire. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1150. Honors Percussion Ensemble. (1) Prerequisite: Audition. An advanced performing ensemble that focuses on the percussion ensemble repertoire. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1151. Percussion Ensemble. (1) Prerequisite: Permission of instructor. A performing ensemble that focuses on the percussion ensemble repertoire. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1152. Mallet Keyboard Ensemble. (1) Prerequisite: Permission of instructor. A performing ensemble that focuses on the mallet keyboard repertoire. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1155. Piano Ensemble. (1) Prerequisite: Permission of instructor. A performing ensemble that focuses on the piano ensemble repertoire. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1160. Chamber Orchestra. (1) Prerequisite: Permission of instructor. A performing ensemble that focuses on the chamber orchestra ensemble repertoire. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1161. Bonnie Cone String Quartet. (1) Prerequisite: Audition. An advanced performing ensemble that focuses on the string quartet repertoire. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1169. String Chamber Music. (1) Prerequisite: Permission of instructor. A performing ensemble that focuses on the string chamber music repertoire. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1170. Jazz Combo. (1) Prerequisite: Permission of instructor. A small performing ensemble that focuses on jazz repertoire and improvisation. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1175. Vocal Jazz Ensemble. (1) Prerequisite: Permission of instructor. A small performing ensemble that focuses on vocal jazz repertoire and improvisation. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1240-1259. Applied Music. Courses consist of private instruction, a one hour lesson per week (2 credits). Minimum of one hour practice per day per credit hour. May be repeated for credit. Students must sign up for the required labs, MUSC 1300, and a large ensemble (MUPF 1110, MUPF 1112, MUPF 1113, MUPF 1120, or MUPF 1121) concurrently. MUPF 1240. Applied Music: Euphonium. (2) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music major or permission of instructor. Corequisites: MUSC 1300 and MUPF 1112 or MUPF 1113. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1241. Applied Music: Trumpet. (2) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music major or permission of instructor. Corequisites: MUSC 1300 and MUPF 1112 or MUPF 1113. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1242. Applied Music: French Horn. (2) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music major or permission of instructor. Corequisites: MUSC 1300 and MUPF 1112 or MUPF 1113. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1243. Applied Music: Trombone. (2) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music major or permission of instructor. Corequisites: 1300 and MUPF 1112 or MUPF 1113. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1244. Applied Music: Tuba. (2) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music major or permission of instructor. Corequisites: MUSC 1300 and MUPF 1112 or MUPF 1113. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1245. Applied Music: Guitar. (2) Prerequisite: acceptance of a music major or permission of instructor. Corequisites: MUPF 1245L, MUSC 1300, and MUPF 1115. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1246. Applied Music: Harp. (2) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music major or permission of instructor. Corequisites: MUSC 1300 and MUPF 1110, MUPF 1112 or MUPF 1113. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1247. Applied Music: Organ. (2) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music major or permission of instructor. Corequisites: MUSC 1300 and MUPF 1110, MUPF 1112, MUPF 1113, MUPF 1120, or MUPF 1121. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1248. Applied Music: Piano. (2) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music major or permission of instructor. Corequisites: MUSC 1300 and MUPF 1110, MUPF 1112 or MUPF 1113, MUPF 1120, or MUPF 1121. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1249. Applied Music: Violin. (2) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music major or permission of instructor. Corequisites: MUSC 1300 and MUPF 1110. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1250. Applied Music: Viola. (2) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music major or permission of instructor. Corequisites: MUSC 1300 and MUPF 1110. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1251. Applied Music: Cello. (2) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music major or permission of instructor. Corequisites: MUSC 1300 and MUPF 1110. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1252. Applied Music: Bass. (2) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music major or permission of instructor. Corequisites: MUSC 1300 and MUPF 1110. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1253. Applied Music: Voice. (2) Prerequisite: acceptance of a music major or permission of instructor. Corequisites: all students must register for MUSC 1300 as well as MUPF 1120 or MUPF 1121. Additionally, students registered in MUPF 1253.A01 must register for MUPF 1253L.A01, students registered in MUPF 1253.A02 must register for MUPF 1253L.A02, and students registered in MUPF 1253.A03 must register for MUPF 1253L.A03. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1254. Applied Music: Flute. (2) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music major or permission of instructor. Corequisites: MUSC 1300 and MUPF 1112 or MUPF 1113. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1255. Applied Music: Clarinet. (2) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music major or permission of instructor. Corequisites: MUSC 1300 and MUPF 1112 or MUPF 1113. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1256. Applied Music: Saxophone. (2) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music major or permission of instructor. Corequisites: MUPF 1256L, MUSC 1300, and MUPF 1112 or MUPF 1113. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1256L. Saxophone Masterclass. (0) Corequisite: MUPF 1256. Weekly masterclasses for MUPF 1256. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1257. Applied Music: Oboe. (2) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music major or permission of instructor. Corequisites: MUSC 1300 and MUPF 1112 or MUPF 1113. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1258. Applied Music: Bassoon. (2) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music major or permission of instructor. Corequisites: MUSC 1300 and MUPF 1112 or MUPF 1113. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUPF 1259. Applied Music: Percussion. (2) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music major or permission of instructor. Corequisites: MUSC 1300 and MUPF 1112 or MUPF 1113. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUSC 1000. Freshman Music Seminar. (1) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music major. Designed to assist with the intellectual, musical, and social transition from high school to college by cultivating positive attitudes toward learning, increasing the involvement of students in departmental activities, providing an orientation to resources available to students, and developing habits that ultimately lead to success as a music major. (Fall)
MUSC 1100. Rudiments of Music. (3) Introductory skill-building course in music reading. (Fall, Spring)
MUSC 1101. Introduction to Sight Singing. (1) An introduction to basic sight-singing skills. Two contact hours. May be taken concurrently with Class Voice (MUSC 1237) and/or Rudiments of Music (MUSC 1100). (Fall, Spring)
MUSC 1104. The History of Rock Music. (3) A chronological approach to the evolution of rock music, its varied styles and artists. (Fall, Summer)
MUSC 1105. The Evolution of Jazz. (3) A chronological approach to the history of jazz, its main styles and artists. (Spring)
MUSC 1220. Introduction to Instruments. (1) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music major. An introduction to the band and orchestra instruments most often found in school instrumental music programs for pre-service choral/general music teachers. Students will explore the history, acoustics, sound production and basic techniques of instruments in the brass, woodwind, string and percussion families. (Fall)
MUSC 1221. Classroom Instruments. (1) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music major or permission of instructor. A study of various elementary classroom instruments, including percussion, mallet (Orff) instruments, autoharp and guitar. Students will develop/review basic musicreading skills applicable to the playing and teaching of these instruments. One contact hour. (Spring)
MUSC 1223. Woodwind Techniques I. (1) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music major. Playing and teaching techniques and materials for flute, oboe, clarinet, bassoon, and saxophone. (Fall)
MUSC 1224. Woodwind Techniques II. (1) Prerequisite: MUSC 1223. Continuation of MUSC 1223. (Spring)
MUSC 1225. Brass Techniques I. (1) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music major. Playing and teaching techniques and materials for trumpet, horn, trombone, euphonium, and tuba. (Fall)
MUSC 1226. Brass Techniques II. (1) Prerequisite: MUSC 1225. Continuation of MUSC 1225. (Spring)
MUSC 1227. String Techniques I. (1) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music major. Playing and teaching techniques and materials for violin, viola, cello, and bass. Two contact hours. (Fall)
MUSC 1228. String Techniques II. (1) Prerequisite: MUSC 1227. Continuation of MUSC 1227. (Spring)
MUSC 1229. Percussion Techniques. (1) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music major. Playing and teaching techniques and materials for snare drum, timpani, mallet percussion, and accessory instruments. (Fall)
MUSC 1230. Musical Structure and Style I. (2) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music major and MUSC 1100. Study of music fundamentals through simple tonality and 4-part writing. Three contact hours. (Fall)
MUSC 1231. Musical Structure and Style II. (2) Prerequisite: MUSC 1230. Further study of tonal relations, including secondary dominants and modulation. Three contact hours. (Spring)
MUSC 1233. Class Piano I. (1) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music major. Class instruction in piano. Three contact hours. (Fall)
MUSC 1234. Class Piano II. (1) Prerequisite: MUSC 1233. A continuation of MUSC 1233. Three contact hours. (Spring)
MUSC 1237. Class Voice. (1) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music major or permission of instructor. Class instruction in voice. May be repeated for credit. Three contact hours. (Fall)
MUSC 1238. Guitar Class I. (2) Class instruction in guitar using contemporary popular music from a text. Three contact hours. For non-music majors only. (Fall, Spring)
MUSC 1239. Guitar Class II. (2) Continuation of MUSC 1238. Three contact hours. For non-music majors only. (Fall, Spring)
MUSC 1260. Ear Training I. (1) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music major and MUSC 1101. The development of aural skills through sight singing, melodic, rhythmic, and harmonic dictation. Three contact hours. (Fall)
MUSC 1261. Ear Training II. (1) Prerequisite: MUSC 1260. Continuation of Ear Training I. Three contact hours. (Spring)
MUSC 1300. Recital and Concert Attendance. (0) Corequisite: Applied Lessons (MUPF 1240-1259). Lab for Applied Lessons. Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. (Fall, Spring)
MUSC 1401. Music Practicum. (1) Prerequisite: MUSC 1000. Practical application of work in the areas of equipment management, publicity, box office, house management, and stage management. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
MUSC 1402. Opera and Musical Theatre Practicum. (1) Prerequisite: permission of instructor. Practical application of production work in the areas of: introductory stage rigging, lighting adjustments, supertitling, costume, props, backstage management and backstage crew for final rehearsals and performances of the Opera Workshop ensemble. May be repeated for credit. (Spring)
MUSC 2137. Phonetics and Articulation for Singers I. (2) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music major or permission of instructor. Pronunciation and articulation in vocal music in English and Italian. Three contact hours. (Fall)
MUSC 2138. Phonetics and Articulation for Singers II. (2) Prerequisites: MUSC 2137 and permission of instructor. Pronunciation and articulation in vocal music in German and French. Three contact hours. (Spring)
MUSC 2140. Oboe Reedmaking. (1) Designing and adjusting American-style oboe reeds, including techniques for cane gouging, shaping, and sharpening the double-hollow-ground knife. May be repeated for credit. Two contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
MUSC 2151. Introduction to Music Technology. (2) Prerequisite: permission of the instructor. The study of contemporary MIDI and computer related technologies available to musicians. (Spring)
MUSC 2191. Incorporating Music Into the Elementary Classroom. (3) Students will develop basic music skills that will allow them to choose, prepare, and teach appropriate music materials for inclusion in the classroom curricula. Non-music majors only. Three contact hours. Field work required. (Fall)
MUSC 2230. Musical Structure and Style III. (2) Prerequisite: MUSC 1231. Further study in tonal relations, including borrowed chords, Neapolitan and augmented sixth chords. Three contact hours. (Fall)
MUSC 2231. Musical Structure and Style IV. (2) Prerequisite: MUSC 2230. Study of late 19th and early 20th century chromaticism, including impressionism--may include a study of some formal designs. Three contact hours. (Spring)
MUSC 2233. Class Piano III. (1) Prerequisite: MUSC 1234. Continuation of Class Piano II. Three contact hours. (Fall)
MUSC 2234. Class Piano IV. (1) Prerequisite: MUSC 2233. Continuation of Class Piano III. Two contact hours. (Spring)
MUSC 2235. Jazz Improvisation I. (2) Prerequisites: MUSC 1230, MUSC 1231 and/or permission of instructor. An introduction to jazz theory and its execution through instrumental improvisation. Detailed study of harmony, chord/scale relationships, musical forms, and the integration of this knowledge into performance. (Fall)
MUSC 2236. Jazz Improvisation II. (2) Prerequisites: MUSC 2235 and permission of instructor. A continuation of MUSC 2235, with greater emphasis on performance and integration of advanced harmonic/melodic devices and concepts, solo transcriptions, basic piano voicings, and composition memorization. (Spring)
MUSC 2260. Ear Training III. (1) Prerequisite: MUSC 1261. Continuation of Ear Training II. Three contact hours. (Fall)
MUSC 2261. Ear Training IV. (1) Prerequisite: MUSC 2260. Continuation of Ear Training III. Three contact hours. (Spring)
MUSC 2271. Fundamental Recording Techniques. (1) Prerequisite: Permission of the department. This course will provide music majors with a comprehensive and well-rounded education in fundamental areas of audio recording. One credit hour, once contact hour. Open to all music majors and other majors by permission of the instructor. (Fall, Spring)
MUSC 3001. Topics in Music. (1-6) Prerequisite: permission of instructor. Special topic in music. May be repeated for credit. (On demand)
MUSC 3130. Counterpoint. (2) Prerequisite: MUSC 2231. An introduction to the polyphonic techniques of 16th and 18th century music. (Fall)
MUSC 3134. Fundamentals of Conducting. (2) Prerequisite: MUSC 2231 and MUSC 2261. Conducting techniques for instrumental and choral ensembles. Field work required. Three contact hours. (Fall)
MUSC 3135. Choral Conducting. (2) Prerequisites: MUSC 2138, 3134, and 3170. Developing conducting skills for interpreting choral music. Field work required. (Spring)
MUSC 3136. Instrumental Conducting. (2) Prerequisite: MUSC 3134. Developing conducting skills for interpreting instrumental music. Field work required. (Spring)
MUSC 3150. Accompanying for Pianists. (1) Corequisite: MUPF 1248. Accompanying techniques for pianists. Required accompanying of solos by other student musicians. May be repeated for credit. One contact hour. (Fall, Spring)
MUSC 3151. Accompanying for Music Educators. (1) Prerequisite: MUSC 2234. Accompanying techniques for pre-service choral/general music teachers, with an emphasis on techniques appropriate for use in the classroom and rehearsals. May be repeated for credit. One contact hour. (Fall, Spring)
MUSC 3160. Guitar History and Literature. (2) A study of the development of the classical guitar repertoire, the styles and techniques of playing and the performance practices and the major composers from the 16th century to the present. Three contact hours. (On demand)
MUSC 3170. Music History I. (3)  Prerequisites: MUSC 2231 and MUSC 2261. Limited to music majors only. Music history and literature from Classical Antiquity through the Baroque Period. (Fall)
MUSC 3171. Music History II. (3) (W, O) Prerequisite: MUSC 3170. Music history and literature from the Classical period to the present. (Spring)
MUSC 3197. Marching Band Techniques and Materials. (2) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music major. Designed for music majors interested in teaching marching band, the course includes discussion of the organization and administration of marching band programs in school settings, the application of teaching techniques for the outdoor program and the practical use of computerized software for designing and teaching of field drills. Field-experience observations of school groups are required. Three contact hours. MUSC 3275. MIDI Synthesis Technology. (2) Prerequisite: Permission of instructor. A study of contemporary computer-based sequencing software, MIDI keyboards, modules, controllers, and basic recording and arranging techniques. Two contact hours. (Summer)
MUSC 3831. Composition. (2) Prerequisite: permission of instructor. Private instruction. May be repeated for credit. One contact hour. (Spring)
MUSC 4001. Topics in Music. (1-6) Prerequisite: permission of instructor. Special topic in music. May be repeated for credit. (On demand)
MUSC 4100. Introduction to Music Business. (2) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music major. An overview of various aspects of the music business, including marketing, promotion, communication, conduct, organization, accounting, and administration. Class projects may include the creation of promotional materials and planning a CD/DVD recording project. (Spring)
MUSC 4132. Guitar Pedagogy and Materials. (3) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music major. An introduction to the teaching of the principles of classical guitar playing, including the performance practices and the music of major composers from the 16th century to the present. Three contact hours. (On demand)
MUSC 4133. Wind Pedagogy and Materials. (3) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music major. A methodology course dealing with the techniques and materials necessary for offering private instruction on woodwind and brass instruments. (Spring)
MUSC 4134. String Pedagogy and Materials. (3) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music major. A methodology course outlining the teaching techniques, materials and related literature necessary for offering applied instruction on string instruments. (Spring)
MUSC 4135. Percussion Pedagogy and Materials. (3) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music major. A methodology course dealing with the techniques and materials necessary for offering private instruction on percussion instruments. (Fall)
MUSC 4136. Keyboard Pedagogy and Materials. (3) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music major. A methodology course dealing with piano performance and teaching including: technique, learning procedures/styles, performance, physiology, methods, wellness issues, and technology. (Fall)
MUSC 4137. Vocal Pedagogy and Materials. (3) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music major and two semesters of MUPF 1253. A methodology course designed to present the physiological and acoustical bases for a coherent approach to the teaching of singing. Areas of vocal technique to be studied include the physiology of the voice, posture, breathing, onset of sound, articulation, vocal registration, and other related areas. (Spring)
MUSC 4138. Jazz Pedagogy and Materials. (3) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music major. The teaching and conducting of public school instrumental and vocal jazz ensembles, including rehearsal techniques, concert presentation, the history and theory of jazz, sources for appropriate teaching materials and improvisation techniques. Field work required. Three contact hours. (Spring)
MUSC 4145. Orchestration and Arranging. (3) Prerequisite: acceptance as a music major. Techniques used to arrange music for instrumental and vocal ensembles from existing sources. Three contact hours. (Fall)
MUSC 4230. Form and Analysis. (3) Prerequisite: MUSC 2231. Study of larger musical structures such as symphony, concerto, contrapuntal designs, and 20th century approaches to form and analysis. (Fall)
MUSC 4231. Post-tonal Processes. (3) Prerequisite: MUSC 4230. Study of 20th century music, including Neoclassicism, Post-serialism, Minimalism, and Neoromanticism. (Spring)
MUSC 4900. Senior Project. (3) Prerequisite: permission of the chairperson and successful completion of all portions of the Sophomore Screening examination. The project may consist of written historical, theoretical, or technological research; original compositions recorded and performed; or a lecture supported by written original research and documentation. (Fall, Spring)
NURN 3103. Concepts of Professional Nursing Service. (3) Prerequisite: Admission to RN/BSN curriculum or permission of instructor. Introduces professional nursing with emphasis on theoretical, ethical, and legal models guiding practice. (Fall, Spring)
NURN 3108. Health Assessment for Nurses. (3) Prerequisites: Admission to the RN-BSN Program, BIOL 1274, BIOL 1259. Pre- or corequisites: NURN 3103. Corequisite: NURN 3108L. Evaluation of human function using interview and physical examination data within a framework for clinical decision making. Competencies necessary for holistic health assessment across the lifespan. (Fall, Spring)
NURN 3108L. Health Assessment Lab. (0) Prerequisite: Admission to the RN-BSN Program. Corequisite: NURN 3108. Evaluation of human function using interview and physical examination data within a framework for clinical decision making. Competencies necessary for holistic health assessment across the lifespan. NURN 4100. Aging and Health. (3)  Restricted to RNs enrolled in the RN/BSN Program. Prerequisites: NURN 3108; CHEM 1203; SOCY 1101 or ANTH 1101; and PSYC 1101. Examination of physiological process of aging as a normal life experience. Study of psychological, nutritional, and general health issues designed to facilitate high level wellness. (Fall, Spring)
NURN 4201. Information Technology: Applications in Health Care. (2) Prerequisite: Upper-division standing or permission of instructor. A study of the use of computers and information technology in health care. Emphasis is placed on development of the knowledge and competencies necessary for selective use of evaluation of informatics, computer technology and data management in health care. (Spring, Summer)
NURN 4203. Leadership in Nursing Practice. (2) Prerequisite: Admission to the RN-BSN Program and NURN 3103. Analysis of professional nursing practice in relation to current trends and issues in health care delivery systems. (Fall, Summer)
NURN 4440. Community Health Nursing. (6)  Prerequisites: Admission to the RN-BSN Program, STAT 1220, BIOL 1259, CHEM 1203, BIOL 1274, ENGL 1101, and SOCY 1101 or ANTH 1101, and NURN 3103. Development of competencies for the nursing care management of culturally diverse individuals, families, and populations within communities with emphasis on the nurse’s role in health promotion and maintenance. Particular focus on risk identification and reduction throughout the life span. Multiple community-based agencies are utilized. Access to a working automobile is required for each clinical day. (Spring, Summer)
NURN 4450. Design and Coordination of Care. (6)  Prerequisites: Admission to the RN-BSN Program, BIOL 1259, BIOL 1274, CHEM 1203, NURN 4201, NURN 4203, NURN 3108, and NURN 4900. Clinical practicum incorporating theory-based practice in a variety of settings with clients who have multiple health care needs. Emphases are on clinical judgment and decision-making, diagnostic reasoning, clinical ethics, collaboration and case management. Examination of nursing therapeutics within the structure of nursing process and nursing diagnosis. (Fall, Spring)
NURN 4900. Research in Nursing Practice. (2) Prerequisites: Admission to the RN-BSN Program, STAT 1220, ENGL 1101, and NURN 3103. Exploration of the theoretical foundations of nursing with emphasis on research, theories, concepts and processes leading to their application in practice.(Fall, Summer)
NURS 2100. General Nutrition. (2) Prerequisite: CHEM 1204 or 1252. A solid knowledge base of general nutrition viewed from a life cycle perspective. Exploration of behavioral aspects and scientific concepts related to nutrition. Open to Pre-nursing majors, sophomore standing. (Fall, Spring)
NURS 2200. Human Growth and Development. (3) Pre- or corequisites: BIOL 1273 and 1273L. Study of the developing person through the lifespan by examining the relationship of selected environmental and social factors to human growth and development. Consideration of the meaning of health and illness to the individual, the family, and the community within the context of life as a continuing, dynamic process from conception through death. Open to Pre-nursing majors, sophomore standing. (Fall, Spring)
NURS 2201. Communication in Caring Relationships. (2) Prerequisites: ENGL 1101, ENGL 1102, PSYC 1101, and SOCY 1101 or ANTH 1101. Introduction to essential communication competencies within the context of helping relationships. Emphasis is on communication processes, cultural competence, and skills in a therapeutic relationship. Open to Pre-nursing majors, sophomore standing. (Fall, Spring)
NURS 3102. Introduction to Nursing Science. (3) Prerequisite: Admission to the Nursing Major. An introduction to the theoretical and scientific basis of nursing practice, including an overview of the profession and examination of major concepts, theories, and models. (Fall, Spring)
NURS 3105. Concepts of Professional Nursing. (3) Prerequisite: Admission to the Nursing Major. Corequisite: NURS 3106 (Skills Set I) and NURS 3108 (Health Assessment.) Concepts and standards fundamental to professional nursing practice. Explores the unique role of nursing in the healthcare system. (Fall, Spring)
NURS 3106. Skill Set I – Basic. (1) Prerequisite: Admission to the Nursing Major. Corequisite: NURS 3105 (Concepts of Professional Nursing.) Introduction of skills and psychomotor activities for the basic care of simulated clients. Three hours of skills lab practice per week in a learning module format. (Fall, Spring)
NURS 3107. Pathophysiology: Clinical Concepts of Illness and Disease. (3) Prerequisite: Admission to the Nursing Major. Conceptual basis of alterations in physiological processes that disrupt or impair health and the body’s response to illness and disease. Building on knowledge obtained in previous courses in the biological and social sciences, this course provides a foundation for building critical thinking skills in the differentiation of disease and illness. (Fall, Spring)
NURS 3108. Health Assessment and Application. (3) Prerequisite: Admission to the Nursing Major. Pre- or corequisites: NURS 3105, NURS 3106, and NURS 3107. Evaluation of human function using interview and physical examination data within a framework for clinical decision making. Competencies necessary for holistic health assessment across the lifespan. (Fall, Spring)
NURS 3205. Pharmacology in Health and Illness. (3) Prerequisites: Admission to the Nursing Major and NURS 3107 or permission of instructor. Presentation of the theoretical base for the safe and therapeutic use of drugs. Examination of Pharmacologic agents commonly used in health and illness and the standards and societal controls of drugs are explored. (Fall, Spring)
NURS 3206. Skill Set II – Intermediate. (1) Prerequisites: Admission to the Nursing Major and NURS 3106. Corequisites: NURS 3430 and NURS 3440. The acquisition of intermediate psychomotor activities for the care of simulated clients with intermediate disease processes. Three hours of skills lab per week in a learning module format. After successful completion of this course, students will be eligible to be listed on the North Carolina Board of Nursing Nurse Aide II Registry. (Fall, Spring)
NURS 3230. Illness and Disease Management. (3) Prerequisite: Admission to the Nursing Major. Corequisites: NURS 3206 and NURS 3430. Focus on health promotion strategies and nursing interventions appropriate for planning care of adult clients with basic pathophysiological alterations. (Fall, Spring)
NURS 3250. Nursing Care of the Childbearing Family. (2) Prerequisites: Junior 1 Nursing Courses. Corequisite: NURS 3440. Foundations of nursing care of families during the childbearing year. Emphasis on the nurse’s role in health assessment, health promotion and promotion of adaptive processes of the individual and family during pregnancy, birth, transition to parenthood, and the newborn period, including alterations in health status. (Fall, Spring)
NURS 3260. Nursing Care of Children. (2) Prerequisites: Junior 1 Nursing Courses. Corequisite: NURS 3440. Foundations of nursing care of children and families during the childrearing years. Emphasis on the nurse’s role in health assessment, health promotion and promotion of adaptive processes of the child and family during childhood from infancy to adolescence, including alterations in health status. (Fall, Spring)
NURS 3425. Practicum in Concepts of Professional Nursing. (1) This clinical course introduces the application of concepts, skills and values fundamental to professional nursing practice. (Fall, Spring)
NURS 3430. Practicum Illness and Disease Management. (3) Prerequisites: Admission to the Nursing Major and NURS 3108. Pre- or Corequisites: NURS 3206 and NURS 3230. Clinical practice in health care settings that correlates with theoretical content related to basic pathophysiological alterations. Students will provide care in diverse clinical settings to develop psychomotor sills and apply knowledge in making clinical decisions. (Fall, Spring)
NURS 3440. Practicum in Nursing Care of Children and the Childbearing Family. (3) Prerequisites: Admission to the Nursing Major and NURS 3108. Pre- or Corequisite: NURS 3206. Development of competencies essential for the nursing care of families during the childbearing and childrearing years. A variety of clinical experiences are provided, including community-based care, patient education, and in-patient care, with an emphasis on familycentered nursing practice. (Fall, Spring)
NURS 3895. Independent Study in Nursing. (1-4) Prerequisite: permission of the instructor. Directed individual study in a selected aspect of nursing which is explored in greater depth than included in the planned curriculum. May be repeated for additional credit as focus of the study varies. No more than six hours in NURS 3895 and/or 4090 may be counted toward degree requirements. (On demand)
NURS 4000. Topics in Nursing. (1-3) Prerequisite: permission of the instructor. Critical examination of selected current topics in nursing. (Fall, Spring)
NURS 4090. International Comparative Health Systems: Western Europe. (3) Cross-listed as HLTH 4090. A two-week study tour to explore the cultures, social, and health care systems in Western Europe and to compare them with systems in the United States. Participants will visit a variety of health care sites and attend presentations by practitioners and educators. They will have opportunities to interact with people from the host countries and visit a variety of cultural and historic sites. (Summer)
NURS 4100. Nursing Care of the Aging Adult. (3) Prerequisite: Senior Standing in the Nursing Program. Examination of the processes of aging. Study of the nursing care for healthy, aging adults; frail, aging adults; institutionalized, aging adults; and dying, aging adults. (Fall, Spring)
NURS 4106. Skill Set III – Complex. (1) Prerequisite: Admission to the Nursing Major and NURS 3206. Corequisite: NURS 4130. The acquisition of complex psychomotor skills in caring for simulated clients with complex disease processes. Three hours of skills lab per week in a learning module format. (Fall, Spring)
NURS 4120. Psychiatric Mental Health Nursing. (3) Prerequisites: Admission to the Nursing Major and NURS 3430 and NURS 3440. Corequisite: NURS 4420. This course provides the foundation of Psychiatric Mental Health Nursing with emphasis on biopsychosocial content in the understanding and care of acute and chronic and chemically dependent clients. (Fall, Spring)
NURS 4130. Complex Illness and Disease Management. (3) Prerequisites: Admission to the Nursing Major and NURS 3230. Prerequisite or corequisite: NURS 4106. Corequisite: NURS 4430. Illness and disease management of adult patients with complex pathophysiological alterations. Focus is on care management of clients with complex and pathophysiological health needs. (Fall, Spring)
NURS 4192. Enhancing Clinical Judgment. (3) Prerequisites: Admission to the RN-BSN Completion option or instructor’s permission. Enhances student’s ability to make sound nursing clinical judgments. Students have the opportunity to (a) reflect on their own style of thinking, (b) examine the role of critical thinking in making clinical judgments, (c) learn strategies for enhancing critical thinking and clinical reasoning, (d) practice applying the strategies in a variety of case studies, (e) critically study their own clinical practice, and (f) benefit from learning via online group discussion with peers. (On demand)
NURS 4193. Professional Communication: Clinical Decision Making and Ethical Reasoning. (3) Prerequisite: Admission to the major. This course is designed to provide the student with skills needed to interact with clients, families, and other health professionals. A variety of communication strategies that facilitate more effective functioning as a professional are explored. Experiential activities and online seminars are designed to enhance awareness of personal and professional values in relation to ethical questions in practice. Students are challenged to synthesize communication strategies based on principles from nursing, psychology, communications and other disciplines. (On demand)
NURS 4194. Building Community Response to Domestic Violence. (3) Open to non-nursing majors. Emphasizes an understanding of professional helping roles in the prevention and intervention of domestic violence. The course emphasizes the importance of a “community” response to domestic violence that includes the role of law enforcement, health care, men’s treatment, and women’s shelter and advocacy programs. (On demand)
NURS 4203. Leadership and Informatics for Nursing Practice. (3) Prerequisite: Admission to the Nursing Major. Corequisite: NURS 4450. Introduction to leadership focusing on health care systems and the nurse’s role. Explore external and internal forces that affect the work environment and how to influence those forces. Discuss the work environment that best motivates people and creates an atmosphere that inspires, instills confidence and sustains individuals. Incorporate understanding of self to enhance beginning leadership. (Fall, Spring)
NURS 4240. Population Focused Nursing. (3) Prerequisite: Admission to the Nursing Major. Corequisite: NURS 4440. Examination and analysis of concepts and theories related to care of populations from a perspective of social justice. Focuses on health indicators and risk reduction in diverse groups across the lifespan and development of community partnerships within health care systems. (Fall, Spring)
NURS 4420. Practicum in Psychiatric Mental Health Nursing. (3) Prerequisite: Admission to the Nursing Major. Corequisite: NURS 4120. Development of competencies necessary for the practice of psychiatric mental health nursing. Emphasis is on the use of self in relationships, psychiatric nursing assessment, nursing interventions with clients and working as a member of the health care team. A variety of clinical settings are used. (Fall, Spring)
NURS 4430. Practicum in Complex Illness & Disease Management. (3)  Prerequisites: Admission to the Nursing Major, NURS 3230, and NURS 3430. Corequisites: NURS 4106, NURS 4130. Clinical practice in health care settings that correlate with theoretical content related to complex pathophysiological alterations. Students will provide care in diverse clinical settings to continue to develop psychomotor skills and apply knowledge for clinical decision-making and reasoning. this course meets the university General Education Requirement for Oral Communication. (Fall, Spring)
NURS 4440. Practicum in Population Focused Nursing. (2) Prerequisite: Admission to the Nursing Major. Corequisite: NURS 4240. Development of competencies related to care of diverse populations. Precepted experiences occur in a variety of communities and agencies that provide opportunities for interdisciplinary experiences. Forty-five clinical hours (45 hrs.) Access to a working automobile is required for all clinical experiences. (Fall, Spring)
NURS 4450. Design and Coordination of Care. (3)  Prerequisites: Admission to the Nursing Major and NURS 4430. Corequisite: NURS 4203. Clinical application of knowledge and skills in the design, management, and coordination of care for clients in a variety of health care settings. Precepted clinical experience with written clinical decision making projects. This course meets the university General Education requirements for Writing in the Discipline. (Fall, Spring)
NURS 4600. Seminar in Professional Licensure. (1) Prerequisite: NURS 4130. Addresses the required components for professional licensure in nursing, including preparation for the NCLEX-RN exam. Students take this course during the last semester before graduation. Class meets two hours a week during the final 7 weeks of the semester. (Fall, Spring)
NURS 4900. Research in Nursing Practice. (2) Prerequisite: Admission to the Nursing Major. Exploration of research methodologies relative to nursing practice, with emphasis on research utilization and evidence-based practice. (Fall, Spring)
OPER 3000. Topics in Operations Management. (3) Prerequisite: OPER 3100. Topics from the areas of Operations Management. The course may be repeated for credit. (On demand)
OPER 3100. Operations Management. (3) Prerequisites: MATH 1120, STAT 1220, ACCT 2121, 2122; ECON 2101, 2102; INFO 2130; junior standing. Introduction to and development of the management functions in manufacturing and non-manufacturing organizations. A systems approach to the organizational environment, the basic operating functions, the problems and decisions a manager encounters and solution techniques and models. Computer application are included where appropriate. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
OPER 3201. Advanced Operations Management. (3) Prerequisite: OPER 3100 with a C or better or permission of the department. Cases and/or management simulations enable the student to apply the knowledge attained in Operations Management. The student, through an application forum, should develop in greater depth his/her understanding of the operating functions of an organization. (Fall)
OPER 3203. Management Science. (3) Prerequisite: OPER 3100 with a C or better or permission of the department. Analytical approach to understanding the management process and solving management problems with emphasis on existing models and developing insights for problem development and model building. (Fall)
OPER 3204. Management of Service Operations. (3) Prerequisites: OPER 3100 with a C or better or permission of the department. Solving problems and directing employees in service organizations. Topics include location, design, layout, queuing, capacity, scheduling, routing, change, management and quality control. (Spring)
OPER 3206. Managing for Quality. (3) Prerequisites: OPER 3100 with a C or better or permission of the department. A study of management philosophy, practices and analytical processes implemented in quality planning and administration of products and services. Topics include corporate culture, quality design, human factors and motivation, quality cost analyses and auditing, service quality, quality assurance, quality circles, and conformance to design. (Fall, Spring)
OPER 3208. Supply Chain Management. (3) Prerequisites: OPER 3100 with a C or better or permission of the department. Supply chain management is concerned with all of the activities performed from the initial raw materials to the ultimate consumption of the finished product. From a broad perspective, the course is designed to examine the major aspects of the supply chain: the product flows; the information flows; and the relationships among supply chain participants. The course content is interdisciplinary in nature and will cover a variety of topics such as supply chain information technologies, supply chain design, strategic alliances between supply chain participants and supply chain initiatives. (Spring)
OPER 3500. Cooperative Education and 49ership Experience. (0) Prerequisite: Major in Management Information Systems or Operations Management. Enrollment in this course is required for the department's cooperative education and 49ership students during each semester they are working in a position. Acceptance into the Experiential Learning Program by the University Career Center is required. Participating students pay a course registration fee for transcript notation (49ership and co-op) and receive full-time student status (co-op only). Assignments must be arranged and approved in advance. Course may be repeated; evaluation is Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory. Only open to undergraduate students; Graduate level students are encouraged to contact their academic departments to inquire about academic or industrial internship options for credit. For more information, contact the University Career Center. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
OPER 3800. Directed Study. (1-6) Prerequisites: Permission of the department and junior standing. Enrollment granted only by permission of the faculty with whom the work will be performed. The student's work assignments will be designed by the student and faculty member who will oversee the project of study. The credit hours will be determined prior to enrollment and will be based on the particular project undertaken. (On demand)
OPRS 3111. Operations Research: Deterministic Models. (3) Prerequisites: MATH 1242 and 2164. Linear, integer and dynamic programming, the simplex method, networks, PERT and CPM techniques, game theory, and applications. (On demand)
OPRS 3113. Operations Research: Probabilistic Models. (3) Prerequisite: MATH 1242, 2164, and STAT 2122 or MATH/STAT 3122, or permission of the department. Queuing models, inventory models, simulation, markov chains, decision analysis, game theory and probabilistic dynamic programming. (On demand)
OPRS 4010. Topics in Decision Mathematics. (2-3) Prerequisite: Permission of the department. Topics in decision mathematics selected to supplement regular course offerings in this area of mathematics. May be repeated for additional credit with the approval of the department. Credit for the M.A. degree in Mathematics requires approval of the department. (On demand)
OPRS 4113. Game Theory. (3) Prerequisites: OPRS 3111 and one of STAT 2122, MATH/STAT 3122, or OPRS 3113. The theory of zero-sum matrix games, mini-max theorem, optimal strategies, symmetric games, economic models, infinite, separable, polynomial, multi-stage, general-sum and in-person games. A project will be required of all graduate students. (On demand)
OPRS 4114. Dynamic Programming. (3) Prerequisites: ITCS 1214, OPRS 3111, and one of STAT 2122, MATH/STAT 3122 or OPRS 3113. The identification of dynamic programming problems and their solution in terms of recurrence relations. Elementary path problems, resource allocation, shortest path, traveling salesmen problem, discrete-time optimal control, replacement models, and inventory systems. A project will be required of all graduate students. (On demand)
PHIL 1105. Critical Thinking. (3)  Fundamental skills of clear thinking and critical assessment of typical messages by and between persons in everyday situations. Application of logical methods to advertisements, editorials, political speeches and textbooks to distinguish effective from ineffective forms of reasoning. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PHIL 2101. Introduction to Philosophy. (3) Basic concepts and problems of philosophy such as freedom and determinism, mind-body interaction, the status of moral judgments, and the nature of knowledge. Readings from the works of representative philosophers both classical and contemporary. Crosslisted as PHIL 2102, but does not fulfill the General Education writing goal. Students can receive credit for either PHIL 2101 or PHIL 2102, but not both. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
PHIL 2102. Introduction to Philosophy – Writing Intensive. (3)  Basic concepts and problems of philosophy such as freedom and determinism, mindbody interaction, the status of moral judgments, and the nature of knowledge. Readings from the works of representative philosophers both classical and contemporary. Makes substantial use of writing as a tool for learning. Cross-listed as PHIL 2101, but fulfills the General Education writing goal. Students can receive credit for either PHIL 2101 or PHIL 2102, but not both. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PHIL 2105. Deductive Logic. (3) Principles of deductive logic, both classical and symbolic, with emphasis on the use of formal logic in analysis of ordinary language discourse. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PHIL 2165. Introduction to Political Philosophy. (3) Cross-listed as POLS 1170. Survey course which includes an introduction to recognized major political thinkers such as Plato, Aristotle, Hobbes, Locke, Rousseau, and Marx. Included are other politically influential writers such as Confucius, Mary Wollstonecraft, and Martin Luther King. (On demand)
PHIL 2175. Professional Ethics. (3) Basic concepts, principles and cases in ethics for the professions, including a reasoning model for ethical decisions, basic principles and codes of professional ethics, and actual case scenarios from the professions. (On demand)
PHIL 3050. Topics. (3) Prerequisite: permission of the department. Topics chosen from specific areas in philosophy such as freedom and determinism, imagination, detailed study of significant philosophical movements or works. May be repeated for additional credit with the approval of the department. (On demand)
PHIL 3060. Major Figure in Philosophy. (3) Prerequisite: permission of the department. An investigation into the thoughts and writings of a major figure in philosophy with special emphasis on primary sources. Included may be Plato, Aristotle, Descartes, Kant, Heidegger, and others as indicated by departmental needs and interests. May be repeated for additional credit. (On demand)
PHIL 3201. Meaning of Death. (3) Cross-listed as RELS 3201. Death in the western tradition. Philosophical, religious, existential, psychological and literary readings clarifying conceptual problems in our ways of speaking about death. Understanding death as a horizon for understanding life. (On demand)
PHIL 3205. Philosophy In and Of Literature. (3) Relationship between philosophy and literature with special emphasis on the nature of literature as it presents concepts and evaluations. Readings will be in the theory of literature as well as in contemporary novels, plays and short stories for both their philosophical and their aesthetic properties. (On demand)
PHIL 3207. Narrative Philosophy. (3)  Prerequisites: Declared Philosophy major or minor; at least junior standing or permission of the instructor. Explores the use of autobiographical and personal writing in philosophy. (On demand)
PHIL 3211. Ancient Philosophy. (3) Western intellectual and philosophic thought from the early Greeks to the post-Aristotelian period. Readings from the pre-Socratics, Plato, Aristotle, Epicureans, Stoics, Skeptics and Neoplatonists. (Fall)
PHIL 3212. Medieval Philosophy. (3) Western philosophical tradition from Augustine to William of Ockham. Readings include such other authors as Anselm of Canterbury, Bonaventure, Thomas Aquinas and Duns Scotus. (On demand)
PHIL 3213. Modern Philosophy from Descartes to Kant. (3) Modern philosophic and scientific thought. Readings selected from representative works in the 17th to the 19th centuries. (Spring)
PHIL 3214. Contemporary Philosophy. (3) Main problems of contemporary philosophy; pragmatism, logical positivism, linguistic analysis, existentialism. (On demand)
PHIL 3217. American Philosophy. (3) European philosophic movements with counterparts in American thought, leading to distinctly American pragmatism, realism and humanism. Readings from 19th- and 20th-century philosophers. (On demand)
PHIL 3219. History of Ethical Theory. (3) Study of major ethical theories in western philosophical tradition: Plato, Aristotle, Kant, Butler, and Mill. Examination of the fundamental approaches to ethics in the western philosophical tradition and of the historical connections among these fundamental theories. Historical connections include the earlier insights and arguments accepted by later thinkers and the development of concepts from earlier theories to later ones. (Alternate years)
PHIL 3221. Ethics. (3)  A study of the nature and foundations of moral judgment, the principles and criteria for sound moral decisions, and the application of these to contemporary moral issues. Discussion includes such specific problems as: abortion, capital punishment, privacy, war, and sexual morality. (On demand)
PHIL 3223. Existentialism. (3) Existentialist tradition in philosophy and literature including such issues as: authenticity, absurdity and the meaning of life, freedom and morality, anguish, death, and atheism. (On demand)
PHIL 3225. Aesthetics. (3) Major theories of art, including readings from Aristotle, Kant, Nietzsche, Collingwood, Dewey, Langer and Beardsley. Emphasis on expression, criticism, the work of art, and the creative process. (Yearly)
PHIL 3226. Social and Political Philosophy. (3) Cross-listed as POLS 3177. Philosophical concepts involved in understanding and evaluating the basic structure of societies (e.g., economic, educational, legal, motivational and political) including equality, fraternity, freedom and rights. Relevance to contemporary social and political issues stressed. Readings from classical and contemporary sources. (Yearly)
PHIL 3227. Feminist Philosophy. (3) Cross-listed as WGST 3247. Views of contemporary feminist and female philosophers on traditional philosophical issues such as ethics, human nature, the construction of knowledge, modes of social and political organization, the relationship between the mind and the body, and the nature of God. (Yearly)
PHIL 3228. Healthcare Ethics. (3) Major ethical dilemmas within medical science and biology are examined to assist students to identify, analyze, and decide ethical issues in such a way that they can defend their positions to themselves and others. Issues include reproductive and genetic technology, death and dying, patient rights, and justice in distribution of healthcare benefits and burdens. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PHIL 3231. Business Ethics. (3) Ethical problems confronting business as a social institution and individuals in business. Application of ethical theory to business institutions and practices, internal exchanges of business (e.g., hiring, promotions, working conditions, employer/employee rights and duties) and external exchanges (e.g., product safety, environment, depletion, marketing, advertising). (Yearly)
PHIL 3235. Advanced Logic. (3) Advanced systems of logic, with emphasis upon symbolic logic and formal systematic characteristics such as axiomatics and proof techniques. (On demand)
PHIL 3241. Philosophy of Education. (3) Exploration of classic Western approaches to education and the contemporary moral problems faced by America’s schools. Issues to be considered are the effect of race, class, and gender on school culture and teacher preparation. (On demand)
PHIL 3242. Philosophy of Religion. (3) Cross-listed as RELS 3242. Philosophical implications of religious experience including the definitions, development and diverse forms of the problems of belief and reason in modern thought. (On demand)
PHIL 3243. Philosophy of Peace. (3) Cross-listed as LBST 2101-H01. Examination of the nature of peace in relation to the history of war and theory of justice. Relationship between individual, local, state and global values and to the status of the nuclear arms race in the post-cold war world. (Yearly)
PHIL 3244. Philosophy of Body. (3) Opportunity to explore physically as well as mentally the implications of the eastern and western philosophical literature on what the body means to individuals and societies. Philosophical readings about the body’s relationship to the mind, politics, happiness, social interaction and education will be explored through lecture, discussion, writing, and the daily practice of hatha yoga and other physical activities. (On demand)
PHIL 3245. Philosophy of Mind. (3) Conceptual issues in the mind/body problem and the problem of other minds. Analysis of concepts of intention, motivation, consciousness, imagination and emotion. (Alternate years)
PHIL 3247. Philosophy of Science. (3) Epistemological, methodological, metaphysical, interdisciplinary and meta-disciplinary issues arising out of science with "science" construed very broadly to imply a strong connection with all systematic inquiry, either past or present, into natural or social questions. (On demand)
PHIL 3249. Philosophy of Technology. (3) Examination of basic concepts and controversies concerning technology, science, values, and the nature of both ethical and practical judgments. Influence of technology on attitudes toward the environment and self will be combined with more recent concerns such as the siting of hazardous waste dumps and the impact of computer technology on daily lives. Normative and analytic approach is taken toward such issues as hazard assessment, risk management, and decision strategies on democratic control and intelligent use of technical innovation in ways that advance public welfare. (Alternate years)
PHIL 3264. Philosophy of Language. (3) An inquiry into the nature of language that will show the close relation of the Anglo-American tradition to logic and the Continental tradition to linguistics. In addition to focusing on the resulting theories of meaning, the course will address special topics such as linguistic creativity and linguistic violence. (Yearly)
PHIL 3265. Theory of Knowledge. (3) A study of various theories on the nature, foundations and limits of knowledge. Analysis of the notions of knowledge and belief, evidence and the sources of knowledge. Discussion of the principles and criteria for distinguishing knowledge from opinion or belief. Readings from both classical and contemporary sources. (On demand)
PHIL 3275. Metaphysics. (3) Inquiry into the most fundamental and comprehensive structures and categories of reality, especially in relation to persons as knowers and agents. Discussion of such topics as: being, existence and truth; substance, essence and accident; universals and individuals; mind, soul, matter and God. (On demand)
PHIL 3452. Internship in Applied Ethics. (3) Prerequisite: Declared philosophy major or minor; at least junior standing; selection by department. Field experience includes on-site visits to host companies, corporations, or agencies to investigate ethics codes, policies, culture, and practices. Background ethics research on ethics challenges facing the host organization today. Final reports evaluated by faculty advisor and shared with the host organization. (On demand)
PHIL 3791. Honors Thesis I. (2) Prerequisite: permission of the department. Individual or group inquiry into selected philosophic problems. Exposition and discussion of the results. (Fall, Spring)
PHIL 3792. Honors Thesis II. (2) Prerequisite: permission of the department. A continuation of PHIL 3791 focused on the preparation and presentation of an Honors thesis. (Fall, Spring)
PHIL 3851. Practicum in Philosophy. (1-3) Prerequisite: permission of the department. Directed individual study involving the student and instructor in rethinking and reworking some major problems in the teaching of undergraduate philosophy including interaction with a particular class, usually PHIL 1105, 2101 or 2105, in the preparation, presentation and evaluation of the course. (Not for teacher licensure.) (On demand)
PHIL 3853. Research Methods and Publication. (3) Permission of the instructor required. Individual instruction in current methods of research in philosophy through participation in major faculty research project. No more than six hours may apply towards the major in Philosophy. (On demand)
PHIL 3859. Independent Study. (1-3) Prerequisite: permission of the department. Directed individual study of a philosophical issue of special interest to the student. May be repeated for additional credit as the topics vary and with departmental approval. No more than six hours may apply toward the major in Philosophy. (On demand)
PHIL 4050. Topics in Philosophy. (3) Prerequisite: permission of the department. Extra work is required of students receiving graduate credit. Selected problems and issues in philosophy. May be repeated for additional credit as topics vary. (On demand)
PHYS 1000. New Student Seminar. (1) Prerequisite: Permission of department and student must be a declared Physics major. An introduction to the different disciplines within physics, professional opportunities available to physics majors in industry and academia, research interests of the department, and opportunities for student research in the department. Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. This class is required for all physics majors. (Fall)
PHYS 1101. Introductory Physics I. (3) First semester of a two semester algebra-based introductory sequence in physics. Introduction to the fundamental principles of natural phenomena. Topics include kinematics and dynamics of particles, momentum, work, energy, conservation laws, and mechanics of rigid bodies. A knowledge of basic algebra and trigonometry is needed for this class. Three lecture hours each week. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PHYS 1101L. Introductory Physics I Laboratory. (1) Pre- or Corequisite: PHYS 1101. Laboratory investigations illustrating experimental techniques and fundamental principles of natural phenomena. Three laboratory hours each week. If a student has completed PHYS 2101L with a grade of C or better in in a previous semester, the student is exempted from taking PHYS 1101L. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PHYS 1102. Introductory Physics II. (3) Prerequisite: PHYS 1101 with a grade of C or better. Second semester of the algebra-based introductory sequence in physics. An introduction to topics in electromagnetism, optics, and nuclear physics. A knowledge of basic algebra and trigonometry is needed for this class. Three lecture hours each week. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PHYS 1102L. Introductory Physics II Laboratory. (1) Prerequisite: PHYS 1101L (or 2101L). Pre- or corequisite: PHYS 1102. A continuation of PHYS 1101L. Three laboratory hours each week. If a student has completed PHYS 2102L with a grade of C or better in in a previous semester, the student is exempted from taking PHYS 1102L. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PHYS 1130. Introduction to Astronomy. (3) Historical beginnings of astronomy. Motions of celestial bodies. Introduction to space science. The solar system. Optical and radio astronomy. Structure and evolution of stars. Galaxies, cosmology. Three lecture hours each week. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PHYS 1130L. Introduction to Astronomy Laboratory. (1) Prerequisite or corequisite: PHYS 1130. Experimental investigations relating to the acquisition of and interpretation of astronomical data. One threehour laboratory each week. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PHYS 1201. Sports and Physics. (3) Fundamental physics concepts will be introduced and discussed using only sports-related applications, primarily golf, baseball/softball, and auto racing. Specific physics concepts include forces, Newton’s Laws, conservation of energy, conservation of linear momentum, conservation of angular momentum, Bernoulli’s principle for fluid flow, centripetal force, vibrations and sound, and heat transfer. In addition, an understanding of materials characteristics will be important to the discussions. (Fall, Spring)
PHYS 1201L. Sports and Physics Laboratory (1) Corequisite: PHYS 1201. Experimental investigations illustrating the physical principals related to sports activities. Laboratories will include analysis of the physics involved in activities such as basketball, baseball, golf, tennis, soccer, hockey, and football. (Fall, Spring)
PHYS 1202. Introduction to Physics in Medicine. (3) An introductory level course that covers the basics physics principles behind technologies currently used in medicine. The course will examine topics in surgical instrumentation and medical imaging (e.g., the use of lasers in medicine, MRI, ultrasound, CT scanning, and nuclear medicine.) Three lecture hours each week. (Fall)
PHYS 1203. Physics of Music. (3) Fundamental physics concepts will be introduced related to the production and interpretation of sound in musical instruments and the human voice. Specific concepts include forces, kinematics, energy, pressure, simple harmonic motion, fluids, traveling and standing waves, and acoustics. Relationship of physical principles to notes, scales, melody, harmony, rhythm, loudness, pitch, timbre, musical instruments, room acoustics, and recording. (Spring)
PHYS 1203L. Physics of Music Laboratory. (1) Corequisite: PHYS 1203. Laboratory component covering topics introduced in PHYS 1203. Laboratories will include the design and construction of wind and string instruments and percussion. (Spring)
PHYS 2101. Physics for Science and Engineering I. (3) Prerequisite: MATH 1241 with a grade of C or better. Pre- or corequisite: MATH 1242. First semester of a two semester calculus-based introductory sequence in general physics. Topics include kinematics and dynamics of particles, momentum, work, energy, conservation laws, simple harmonic motion, and mechanics of rigid bodies. Three lecture hours each week. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PHYS 2101L. Laboratory I. (1) Pre- or corequisite: PHYS 2101. Experiments selected from motion on an inclined plane, circular motion, momentum and energy in collisions, torques, and conservation laws. Use of the computer for organizing, graphing and analyzing data. Two laboratory hours each week. If a student has completed PHYS 1101L with a grade of C or better in a previous semester, the student is exempted from taking PHYS 2101L. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
PHYS 2102. Physics for Science and Engineering II. (3) Prerequisites: PHYS 2101 and MATH 1242, both with a grade of C or better. Second semester of the calculus-based introductory sequence in general physics. Topics include electric charge, electric fields, and magnetic fields. Three lecture hours each week. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PHYS 2102L. Laboratory II. (1) Prerequisite: PHYS 2101L (or 1101L). Pre- or corequisite: PHYS 2102. A continuation of PHYS 2101L. Experiments selected from series and parallel circuits, RC circuits, EMF and terminal potential difference, electromagnets, and magnetic induction. Two laboratory hours each week. If a student has completed PHYS 1102L with a grade of C or better in a previous semester, the student is exempted from taking PHYS 2102L. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PHYS 3000. Topics in Physics. (1-4) Prerequisite: Permission of department. Special topics which are introductory in nature. May not be applied toward the degree requirements for "additional hours at the 3000/4000 level" without approval of the departmental Undergraduate Studies Committee. May be repeated. (On demand)
PHYS 3101. Topics and Methods of General Physics. (3) Prerequisites: PHYS 2102 and MATH 1242 both with a grade of C or better. Covers additional topics in physics at an introductory level. Subjects will include gravitation, angular momentum, wave motion, geometrical and physical optics, electromagnetic waves, fluid dynamics, and thermodynamics. An emphasis is placed on developing additional background and problem solving skills necessary for students to succeed in upper division physics courses. (Spring)
PHYS 3121. Classical Mechanics I. (3) Prerequisites: PHYS 3101 (or ECGR 2112) and MATH 2171, both with a grade of C or better. Pre- or corequisite: MATH 2241. Topics include Newtonian mechanics, kinetic energy, work and potential energy, harmonic oscillators, projectiles and charged particles without and with viscous friction, linear and angular momentum, vector algebra and coordinate transformations, Taylor expansions, mathematical analysis using complex numbers, Fourier series analysis of vibrational motions. (Fall)
PHYS 3141. Introduction to Modern Physics. (3) Prerequisite: PHYS 2102 (or PHYS 1102) and MATH 1241, both with a grade of C or better. Pre- or corequisite: MATH 1242. Topics include: Special relativity, quantization of charge, light, and energy, the nuclear atom, wavelike properties of particles, introduction to nuclear reactions and applications, introduction to solid state physics, and introduction to particle physics. (Fall, Spring)
PHYS 3151. Thermal Physics. (3) Prerequisites: PHYS 3141 and PHYS 3101, both with a grade of C or better, CHEM 1251 and 1251L, MATH 2241. An introduction to heat, thermodynamics, kinetic theory, and statistical physics. Topics include classical thermodynamics, Maxwell-Boltzmann, Fermi-Dirac and Bose-Einstein distributions. Three lecture hours a week. (Spring)
PHYS 3160. Astrophysics I (Stellar Astrophysics). (3) Prerequisites: PHYS 3141 and MATH 2171 or permission of instructor. An introduction to stellar structure and evolution. Topics covered include observational techniques, the interaction of light and matter, spectral classification, stellar structure and energy transport, nuclear energy sources, evolution off the main sequence, variable stars, and stellar remnants. (Spring) (Odd years)
PHYS 3161. Astrophysics II (Interstellar Matter and Galaxies). (3) Prerequisites: PHYS 3141 and MATH 2171 or permission of instructor. An introduction to the structure and contents of galaxies. Topics covered include the interstellar medium, star formation, galactic kinematics, galactic structure and evolution, active galaxies, and cosmology. (Fall), (Odd years)
PHYS 3210. Introduction to Computational Physics. (3) Prerequisites: PHYS 2102 and MATH 2171, both with a grade of C or better. Building on elementary concepts in physics, an introduction to how computers are used to solve physics problems is given. Skills in programming will be developed in the context of applying computational methods to calculate a variety of physical properties found in mechanics and electrodynamics. Techniques for simulating and visualizing the behavior of systems ranging in complexity starting from a single particle, to a few, to many particles are introduced. Also covered are methods for data analysis, including fitting and plotting results graphically that best highlight physical relationships between variables. (Spring)
PHYS 3220. Mathematical Methods in Physics. (3) Prerequisites: PHYS 2102 and MATH 2241, both with a grade of C or better. Topics include distribution functions, solutions to ordinary and partial differential equations, boundary value problems, Fourier analysis, vectors and matrices, vector calculus, and complex variables. (Fall)
PHYS 3282. Advanced Laboratory in Modern Physics. (3) (W, O) Prerequisites: PHYS 3141 with a grade of C or better. Selected laboratory work in areas such as atomic spectra, radioactive decay, and the interaction of radiation with matter. Emphasis on development of sound laboratory techniques, methods of data analysis, oral communication of results, and the writing of formal laboratory reports. Three hours of laboratory each week. (Spring)
PHYS 3283. Advanced Laboratory in Classical Physics. (3)  Prerequisites: PHYS 2102 and 2102L, both with a grade of C or better. Selected laboratory work in areas such as mechanics, electricity and magnetism, acoustics and thermal physics. Topics are chosen for their relation to important principles and techniques, or for their historical significance. Emphasis on development of sound laboratory techniques, methods of data analysis, and the writing of formal laboratory reports. Three hours of laboratory each week. (Fall)
PHYS 3400. Internship in Community Education and Service. (3) Prerequisites: junior standing, acceptance into the internship program and approval by the Physics department. A project oriented, service-learning internship with cooperating community organizations. Does not count as credit toward departmental requirements in physics. May be repeated once with permission of the department. Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. (On demand)
PHYS 3590. Physics Cooperative Education and 49ership Experience. (0) Prerequisites: junior standing and permission of department. Registration in PHYS 3590 is required of Co-op and 49ership students during each of the semesters they are working. Acceptance into the Experiential Learning Program by the University Career Center is required. Participating students pay a course registration fee for transcript notation (49ership and co-op) and receive full-time student status (co-op only). Assignments must be arranged and approved in advance. Course may be repeated; evaluation is Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory. Only open to undergraduate students; Graduate level students are encouraged to contact their academic departments to inquire about academic or industrial internship options for credit. For more information, contact the University Career Center. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PHYS 3900. Senior Project. (2-3) Prerequisites: PHYS 3282 and 3283 and permission of the faculty member overseeing the project. Independent investigation under the supervision of faculty member on a project that is approved by the departmental Undergraduate Studies committee. May not be applied toward the degree requirements for “additional hours at the 3000/4000 level” without approval of the departmental Undergraduate Studies Committee. (On demand)
PHYS 4000. Selected Topics in Physics. (1-4) Prerequisite: Permission of department. Advanced special topics. May not be applied toward the degree requirements for "additional hours at the 3000/4000 level" without approval of the departmental Undergraduate Studies Committee. May be repeated. (On demand)
PHYS 4110. Introduction to Biomedical Optics. (3) Prerequisites: PHYS 3141 and MATH 2171 both with a grade of C or better. Pre- or corequisite: PHYS 3121 or MEGR 2144. This course will cover the basic principles underlying tissue optics, laser-tissue interactions, and optical imaging, microscopy, and spectroscopy for medical applications. (Spring)
PHYS 4140. Nuclear Physics. (3) Prerequisites: PHYS 3141 and MATH 2171, both with a grade of C or better. Pre- or corequisite: PHYS 3121 (or MEGR 2144). A study of the nucleus, radioactivity, nuclear reactions, fission, fusion, interactions of radiation with matter and measurement of radiation. (Spring)
PHYS 4181. Solid State and Semiconductor Physics Laboratory. (3) Prerequisite: PHYS 4241 or MEGR 3131 or permission of instructor. Laboratory in solid state physics and semiconductor device physics, including electrical and photoconductivity; fluorescence, photoluminescence and Raman Scattering; semiconductor device characteristics; superconductivity; and the Hall Effect. Six laboratory hours each week. (On demand)
PHYS 4222. Classical Mechanics II. (3) Prerequisites: PHYS 3121 and MATH 2241. Continuation of PHYS 3121. Topics include Lagrangian mechanics, two-body central force problems, coupled oscillators and normal modes, Hamiltonian mechanics, non-inertial frames, rigid body motion. (Spring)
PHYS 4231. Electromagnetic Theory I. (3) Prerequisites: PHYS 3121 (or MEGR 2144), MATH 2171, and PHYS 3220 (or MATH 2242), all with a grade of C or better. The first course of a twosemester sequence. Topics covered include vector analysis, electrostatics and electric fields in matter. Three lecture hours each week. (Spring)
PHYS 4232. Electromagnetic Theory II. (3) Prerequisites: PHYS 4231 with a grade of C or better. A continuation of PHYS 4231. Topics covered include magnetostatics, electrodynamics, electromagnetic waves, potentials and fields. Three lecture hours each week. (Fall)
PHYS 4241. Quantum Mechanics I. (3) Prerequisites: PHYS 3141, PHYS 3121 (or MEGR 2144), PHYS 3220 (or MATH 2241) and MATH 2171, all with a grade of C or better. Topics include blackbody radiation, solutions of the time-independent Schrodinger equation, unbound and bound states, the infinite square well, the harmonic oscillator, the hydrogen atom, spin operators, and the Stern-Gerlach experiment. (Fall)
PHYS 4242. Quantum Mechanics II. (3) Prerequisite: PHYS 4241 with a grade of C or better. A continuation of PHYS 4241. Topics include: perturbation theory, atoms in external electric and magnetic fields, the Stark and Zeeman effects, the WKB approximation, selection rules for electromagnetic radiation, scattering theory, multielectron atoms, electrons in solids, Bose- Einstein and Fermi-Dirac distributions. (Spring)
PHYS 4271. Waves and Optics. (3) Prerequisite: MATH 2171 with a grade of C or better. Corequisite or pre-requisite: PHYS 3121 (or MEGR 2144). Topics include ray analysis of common optical elements, wave properties of light, the superposition of periodic and non-periodic waves, and selected topics from geometrical and physical optics. (Fall)
PHYS 4281. Advanced Laboratory in Modern Optics. (3)  Prerequisites: PHYS 3141 and PHYS 3121 (or MEGR 2144) both with a grade of C or better. Selected experiments on topics such as fiber optics, interferometry, spectroscopy, polarization, and holography. Emphasis on the development of sound laboratory techniques, methods of data analysis, and the writing of formal laboratory reports. Six hours of laboratory each week. (Spring, Even years)
PHYS 4350. Teaching and Learning Physics. (3) Prerequisite: PHYS 2102 or permission of instructor. A course on how people learn and understand key ideas related to physics. Course focus includes physics content, pedagogical methods and curriculum, cognitive science, and physics education research. Course includes opportunities for teaching and individualized projects. (On demand)
PHYS 4800. Investigations. (1-2) Prerequisite: junior standing. An independent investigation on a topic approved by the department Undergraduate Studies Committee. May be repeated for up to four hours credit. No more than two credit hours may be applied toward the degree requirements for "additional hours at the 3000/4000 level." (On demand)
POLS 1110. American Politics. (3) Introduction to the role of the President, Congress, Supreme Court, and national administrative agencies in the American political system. Relationship between the American people and their political institutions with emphasis on political culture, the electoral process, political parties, interest groups, and political communication. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
POLS 1173. Political Science Learning Community Freshman Seminar. (3) Prerequisite: Admission to the Political Science Learning Community and permission of instructor. The purpose of this course is to introduce the entering Political Science major to the concepts and tools necessary for studying politics in general and the discipline of political science in particular. The student will learn some critical thinking tools, on-line library skills, and other aspects of political science that will enable the student to more easily negotiate other political science courses. There will be a service component to this class and the possibility of internships. (Fall)
POLS 2120. Introduction to Public Policy. (3) Provides an overview of the policy process in the U.S. focusing on how public problems arise, how they get on the agenda of government, how and why the government responds or fails to respond, defining public policy, explaining how it is made, and who makes it. (Yearly)
POLS 3010. Topics in American Politics or Public Administration. (1-4) An intensive study of a topic in American politics or public administration. The particular topic investigated may vary from semester to semester, and a student may take more than one course under this number. (On demand)
POLS 3103. Public Opinion. (3) A study of attitude and opinion measurement with emphasis on the techniques of survey research and public opinion polling and conservative and liberal tendencies in American public opinion and society. (Yearly)
POLS 3104. Mass Media. (3) An examination of the relationship of mass media to politics and government. Government regulation of the media and how the mass media shape political information and behavior. (Yearly)
POLS 3105. Voting and Elections. (3) Psychological, sociological, and political variables that influence voting behavior and that affect electoral stability and change with emphasis on studies derived from survey research. (Yearly)
POLS 3108. Social Movements and Interest Groups. (3) Analysis of the nature of social movements and interest groups and their role in the American political system. Emphasis on membership recruitment and mobilization, campaigns, lobbying, and influence on parties, public opinion, and public policy. Evaluation of the extent to which these organizations enhance the voices of ordinary citizens versus those of corporations and citizens of high social status. (Yearly)
POLS 3109. Political Parties. (3) Analysis of the role of political parties in the American political system. Emphasis on party organizations, nominations, campaigns, interrelation with interest groups and social movements, and the role of parties in the executive, legislative, and judicial arenas. (Yearly)
POLS 3111. The Congress. (3) Analysis of the role of the Congress in the American political system and its relationships with the other branches of government. Recruitment and socialization of congressmen, the committee system, and roll call analysis. (Yearly)
POLS 3112. The Presidency. (3) Analysis of the role of the Presidency in the American political system and its relationships with the other branches of government. Strategies of presidential nomination and election, the sources and indicators of presidential power, and how those who have held the office have shaped it and been shaped by it. (Yearly)
POLS 3114. Constitutional Law and Policy. (3) Development of American constitutionalism (especially federalism and the separation of powers)
POLS 3115. Civil Rights and Liberties. (3) Utilizes public policy analysis to illuminate judicial decisions and opinions relating to contemporary civil rights and liberties. (Yearly)
POLS 3116. Judicial Process. (3) Introduction to the nature and functions of law; survey of Supreme Court decision making. (Yearly)
POLS 3119. State and Local Government. (3) An introduction to state and local governments, politics, and policies in the United States. Particular attention is paid to state and local government in North Carolina. (Yearly)
POLS 3121. Urban Politics and Policy. (3) Political analysis of a variety of public policy problems in urban areas and proposals to solve them. Attention will be paid to both the substance of the urban policy problem and ways to evaluate alternative solutions. (On demand)
POLS 3123. Urban Political Geography. (3) Crosslisted as GEOG 3110. Spatial organization of metropolitan America. How metropolitan residents organize space into territorial units and the human, social, and political ramifications of that organization. Spatial consequences of the most common modes of political, administrative, and territorial organization. (On demand)
POLS 3124. US Domestic Policy. (3) Examination of the processes of and influences on policy making, including goals and objectives of current U.S. domestic policy. Focus on major policy areas; may include such topics as fiscal and monetary policy, education, transportation, management of national economy, and agriculture, among others. (On demand)
POLS 3125. Health Care Policy. (3) An overview of the development and current functioning of U. S. health care system and public policies regarding the organization, delivery and financing of health care at the federal, state, and local levels. (On demand)
POLS 3126. Administrative Behavior. (3) The role of the administrator and public bureaucracy in modern democratic society, with emphasis on the interplay of forces created by executives, legislators, political parties, and interest groups. (Yearly)
POLS 3128. Politics and Film. (3) Examination of the influence and role of film in American politics. Movies provide important cues about cultures, values, and society, and affect how people perceive or view their environment. Explores and analyzes the images and messages conveyed about American politics, and develops understanding of the role of film in American politics. Requires viewing films in class, discussion, and writing about the films. (On demand)
POLS 4110. North Carolina Student Legislature. (3) (W, O) Prerequisite: permission of instructor. Practicum including workshops, seminars, and guest speakers on legislative process and research, parliamentary procedure, and resolution and bill drafting; participation in an interim council debate at one of the member campuses for one weekend each month during the semester and participation in the NCSL annual session in Raleigh. May be repeated for credit. (Spring)
POLS 1130. Comparative Politics. (3) Introduction to political comparison among nations. Diverse geographical emphases, including Latin America, Europe, Asia, and Africa. Not taught as a writing intensive course. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
POLS 1150. International Politics. (3) Introduction to the analysis of politics among nations: Material and psychological sources of national power; the role of law, force, and diplomacy in world politics; problems of peace and disarmament; and international organization. Not taught as a writing intensive course. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
POLS 3030. Topics in Comparative or International Politics. (1-4) An intensive study of a topic in comparative or international politics. The particular topic investigated may vary from semester to semester, and a student may take more than one course under this number. (On demand)
POLS 3132. Comparative Public Policy. (3) Examination of the policy process and policy outcomes in the United States and other countries. Analyzes policy areas in depth to determine the role that variations in policy culture and political institutions play in shaping policy choices. Examines the possibility and limitations of transferring policy innovation from one polity to another. (On demand)
POLS 3133. Middle East Politics. (3) Political development of Middle Eastern states from the period of European colonization to today. Topics include Arab nationalism, Islamism, the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, democratization, oil and economic development and regional security. (Yearly)
POLS 3135. Terrorism. (3) Addresses four basic questions: (1) What is terrorism? (2) Why does it occur? (3) How does terrorism network? (4) What are the legal, political, and military coping strategies for terrorism? Emphasis on building an understanding of the nature and root causes of terrorism, and understanding the behavioral and psychological framework of terrorism and responses to it. (Yearly)
POLS 3141. European Politics. (3) Comparative analysis of selected European governments including Great Britain, France, Germany, and Italy. (On demand)
POLS 3143. African Politics. (3) A comparative perspective on politics in sub-Saharan Africa and on the performance of post-independence political systems there in terms of national and international integration, economic challenges, and efforts to create stable and democratic civilian regimes. (Yearly)
POLS 3144. Latin American Politics. (3) Cross-listed as LTAM 3144. Comparative overview of political and socio-economic change in Latin America from the colonial period to the present. Primary emphasis on Latin American politics in the twentieth century, competing political ideologies, socio-economic issues, international political economy, and internal political change. (Yearly)
POLS 3148. Chinese Politics. (3) The origins, development, and maintenance of the Chinese political system. The organization and function of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) and other political groups. The impact of tradition on contemporary Chinese politics. (Yearly)
POLS 3151. International Political Economy. (3) Cross-listed as INTL 3151. An analysis of the political dynamics of economic relationships among countries. Attention is focused on the political aspects of monetary, trade, and investment relationships, and the difficulties involved in coordinating policy and maintaining effective international management. (On demand)
POLS 3152. International Organizations. (3) An analysis of the development and functions of formal and informal organizations that govern international politics and markets, including the United Nations system, economic and non-governmental organizations, and regional institutions. (On demand)
POLS 3153. European Union. (3) An analysis of the European Union (EU) from historical, political, and economic perspectives. Emphasis on the institution's actors (especially states and interest groups) and policies of the EU as well as the changing relationship between the EU and its major trading partners such as the U.S. (On demand)
POLS 3154. Cyberspace and Politics. (3) Examination of the advent of information technologies and digital communication in the global community and the impact of these changes on multi-level politics--international, regional, national, and subnational. Four major themes are: exploration of the digital world, cyberspace governance and public policy, electronic government and virtual citizenship, and cyberspace expansion and global reach. Taught mainly as a web-based course. (Yearly)
POLS 3155. Latin American Political Economy. (3) Cross-listed as LTAM 3154. Intersections of politics and economics in Latin America, focusing on the efforts to foster economic development in the region. Emphasis on post-World War II era. Includes issues such as debt management, dependency theory, impact of free market theories, and the power of labor movements. (Yearly)
POLS 3157. American Foreign and Defense Policy. (3) Examines constitutional provisions for foreign policy in the United States, analyzes the formulation and implementation of American foreign policy, and surveys key defense and security policy issues facing the United States. (Yearly)
POLS 3159. Diplomacy in a Changing World. (3) Cross-listed as INTL 3131. Diplomacy, a means to resolve disputes between sovereign states short of war, will be analyzed through case studies drawn from historical context and through a survey of contemporary crises. The American diplomatic process will also be reviewed with particular attention to how policy is shaped, how an embassy functions and how Americans train for the professional diplomatic service. (Yearly)
POLS 3162. International Law. (3) Historical and political analysis of the sources and development of international law. Particular attention is given to the role of modern international law in the relations of nation-states and its application to contemporary global problems. (Yearly)
POLS 3163. Introduction to Model United Nations. (3) (W, O) Prerequisite: permission of the instructor. Preparation for and participation in the Model United Nations (simulation of the United Nations) for students who have not participated in this simulation previously. Includes study of the background of countries to be represented; the history, structure and procedures of the United Nations; drafting of resolutions and position papers; public speaking and caucusing; participation in regional MUN events. (Spring)
POLS 3164. US-Latin American Relations. (3) Cross-listed as LTAM 3164. Addresses the alwayscomplicated and often-conflictive relationship between Latin American and the United States. Particular attention to critical contemporary issues such as the drug trade, immigration, international trade, humanitarian aid and U.S. policy toward Cuba. (Yearly)
POLS 3165. East Asia in World Affairs. (3) Examines the political factors governing diplomatic relations, national order, economic trade, and national security in East Asia. Emphasis on China, Taiwan, Hong Kong, Japan, the Korean peninsula, and the Philippines. (Yearly)
POLS 3166. Politics of the Islamic World. (3) Political development of and current political trends within countries of North and East Africa, the Middle East, Central Asia, and South and Southeast Asia that make up the Islamic World. Topics include the diverse body of Islamic political thought, manifestation of Islamic political thought in contemporary countries and movements, a discussion of how Islamic societies handle diversity and the issue of democratic rule, and the political development of the growing Muslim minority community in the West. (Yearly)
POLS 3169. African International Relations. (3) Cross-listed as AFRS 4105. This course examines Africa’s relations with external powers (including Europe, the United States, and China), cooperation among African countries, the role of non-state actors in African conflicts, and U.S. policy toward the continent. (Yearly)
POLS 3176. Fascism and Communism. (3) The purpose of this course is to consider the philosophies of fascism and communism and those political theorists who contributed to these two twentiethcentury movements. This course will also focus on the implementation of these theories in nations such as Italy, Germany, the Soviet Union, and China. (Fall)
POLS 4163. Advanced Model United Nations. (3) (W, O) Prerequisite: POLS 3163, or the equivalent and permission of the instructor. Preparation for and participation in the Model United Nations (simulation of the United Nations) for students who have completed POLS 3163 or the equivalent. Includes study of the background of countries to be represented; the history, structure and procedures of the United Nations; drafting of resolutions and position papers; public speaking and caucusing; participation in international MUN events. May be repeated for credit. (Spring)
POLS 1170. Introduction to Political Philosophy. (3) Cross-listed as PHIL 2165. Survey course that includes an introduction to recognized major political thinkers such as Plato, Aristotle, Hobbes, Locke, Rousseau, and Marx. Included are other politically influential writers such as Confucius, Mary Wollstonecraft, and Martin Luther King. (Fall, Spring)
POLS 3070. Topics in Political or Legal Philosophy. (3) Analysis of a selected problem in contemporary political philosophy, legal philosophy, or in the history of political philosophy. Includes moral and ethical evaluation of political and social practices and institutions. Readings from classic texts or contemporary works. Topic for consideration changes from semester to semester. Course may be repeated with permission of instructor. (On demand)
POLS 3171. History of Classical Political Philosophy. (3) Major concepts and systems of political philosophy of Ancient Greece and Rome. (Fall)
POLS 3172. African-American Political Philosophy. (3) Cross-listed as AFRS 3179. Prerequisite: 3000 level course on Africa from AFRS, HIST, or POLS. Major competing ideologies in African-American political philosophy. (On demand)
POLS 3173. History of Modern Political Philosophy. (3) Major concepts and systems of western political philosophy from the 16th-19th century. (Spring)
POLS 3175. Philosophy of Law. (3) Philosophy underlying the legal system and the Anglo-American practice of law. Will usually include topics such as what is “law,” obligation to obey the law, liberty, privacy and tolerance, and criminal responsibility and punishment. (Yearly)
POLS 3177. Social and Political Philosophy. (3) Cross-listed as PHIL 3226. Philosophical concepts involved in understanding and evaluating the basic structure of societies (e.g., economic, educational, legal, motivational, and political) including equality, fraternity, freedom, and rights. Relevance to contemporary social and political issues stressed. Readings from classical and contemporary sources. (On demand)
POLS 3250. Political Sociology. (3) Cross-listed as SOCY 3250. Prerequisite: SOCY 1101. Sociological analysis of the relationship between social, economic and political systems. Focuses on power relations in society and its effects on the distribution of scarce resources. Topics covered may include: theories of power and the nation state, political participation and voting, religion and politics, the comparative welfare state, media and ideology, the global economy, war and genocide, revolutions, and social movements. Not open to students who have credit for SOCY 3251 or POLS 3251. (Yearly)
POLS 3251. Political Sociology. (3)  Cross-listed as SOCY 3251. Prerequisite: SOCY 1101. Sociological analysis of the relationship between social, economic and political systems. Focuses on power relations in society and its effects on the distribution of scarce resources. Topics covered may include: theories of power and the nation state, political participation and voting, religion and politics, the comparative welfare state, media and ideology, the global economy, war and genocide, revolutions, and social movements. Not open to students who have credit for SOCY 3250 or POLS 3250. (Yearly)
POLS 2220. Political Science Methods. (4)  Prerequisite: at least one introductory Political Science course. This course builds the knowledge skills ability (KSA) of students, in other words increases their information literacy. Emphasis on how to do literature searches, write professional papers as political scientists, and manipulate data with computer statistical packages. Restricted to Political Science majors. Recommended to be take before majors begin to take upper level courses. Three hours of lecture and one hours of computer laboratory per week. (Fall, Spring)
POLS 3400. Internship in Political Science. (3-6) Prerequisite: Permission of the department. Practical experience in politics by working for a party, campaign organization, political office holder, news medium, government agency, or other political organization. Minimum of 150 working hours for three hours credit; minimum of 300 working hours for six hours credit. No more than six credits may be received through this course. Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
POLS 3800. Independent Study. (1-3) Prerequisite: Permission of the instructor. Supervised investigation of a political problem that is (1) of special interest to the student; (2) within the area of the instructor's special competence; and (3) normally an extension of previous coursework with the instructor. A student may take more than one course under this number but not more than three hours a semester. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
POLS 4600. Senior Seminar. (3) (O, W) Prerequisite: POLS 1110, POLS 1130, POLS 1150, and POLS 2220. Capstone course for majors only. Seminar style exploration of a selected topic in the discipline. Includes writing a research paper and presenting the results to the class. (Fall, Spring)
POLS 4990. Senior Thesis. (3) (O, W) Prerequisite: POLS 2220. The student completes an article-length research paper under the supervision of a member of the faculty. The paper must involve quantitative or other methods of modern political analysis. Restricted to majors. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PORT 1201. Elementary Portuguese I. (3) Fundamentals of the Portuguese language, including speaking, listening comprehension, reading, and writing. (Fall)
PORT 1202. Elementary Portuguese II. (3) Prerequisite: PORT 1201 or permission of the department. Fundamentals of the Portuguese language, including speaking, listening comprehension, reading, and writing. (Spring)
PORT 2201. Intermediate Portuguese I. (3) Prerequisite: PORT 1202 or permission of the department. Review of grammar, with conversation and composition. (Fall)
PORT 2202. Intermediate Portuguese II. (3) Prerequisite: PORT 2201 or permission of the department. Continued review of grammar, conversation, and composition. (Spring)
PORT 3050. Topics in Portuguese. (1-3)  Course may be repeated with change of topic. (On demand)
PORT 3201. Portuguese Grammar and Conversation. (3) Prerequisite: PORT 2202 or permission of the department. Review of Portuguese grammar and guided conversation on prepared topics. Emphasis on spoken Portuguese. (Fall)
PORT 3202. Portuguese Grammar and Conversation. (3) Prerequisite: PORT 3201 or permission of the department. Review of Portuguese grammar and guided compositions on prepared topics. Emphasis on vocabulary, idiomatic expressions, and stylistics. (Spring)
PSYC 1101. General Psychology. (3) A survey of the field including such topics as learning, emotions, motivation, personality, psychological testing, and abnormal behavior. Emphasis on psychology as a behavioral science. May be taken with or without the lab. All psychology majors and those who wish to apply this course as partial fulfillment of the University science and technology requirement must take PSYC 1101L during the same semester in which they take PSYC 1101. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PSYC 1101L. General Psychology Laboratory. (1) An introduction to laboratory equipment and procedures. Meets two hours per week. (May not be taken apart from the lecture portion of PSYC 1101 except by psychology majors and minors with permission of the department.) (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
PSYC 2102. Research Methodology. (4)  Prerequisites: PSYC 1101 and 1101L, and STAT 1222. Experimental, observational, and correlational methods of psychological research. Basic concepts of philosophy of science will also be discussed. Emphasis on methodology rather than content and applicability of methods to current topics in psychology. Three lecture hours and one two-hour laboratory period a week. (Fall, Spring) (Evenings)
PSYC 2112. Introduction to Behavior Modification. (4) Prerequisite: PSYC 1101. Methods and constructs of behavior modification, including the application of the methods to laboratory research. Three lecture hours and one two-hour laboratory period a week. (On demand)
PSYC 2120. Child Psychology. (3) Prerequisite: PSYC 1101. Psychological development in infancy and childhood, including such topics as biological change, learning, thought, language, social relations, intelligence, and morality. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PSYC 2121. Adolescent Psychology. (3) Prerequisite: PSYC 1101. Developmental and psychological characteristics of adolescents, with emphasis on the developmental transitions, social contexts, and problems of adolescence. (Fall, Spring)
PSYC 2124. Psychology of Adult Development and Aging. (3) Cross-listed as GRNT 2124. Psychological development through adulthood and old age. Emphasis on processes underlying continuity and change in adulthood, including personality and socialization, cognitive development, and the psychophysiology of aging. (Yearly)
PSYC 2150. Psychology of Adjustment. (3) Prerequisite: PSYC 1101. The study of the process of adjustment and factors that may influence adaptation. Consideration is given to psychological reactions to critical problems encountered in modern life. Introduction to different approaches to intervention and treatment. (Fall, Spring)
PSYC 2160. Introduction to Health Psychology. (3) Prerequisite: PSYC 1101. An introduction to the contributions of the discipline of psychology to the promotion and maintenance of health, the prevention and treatment of illness, and the improvement of the health care system. Topics include the role of stress and physiological factors in illness, chronic pain disorders and pain management, lifestyle and psychosocial influences on health, and the influence of illness of interpersonal relationships. (Fall, Spring)
PSYC 2171. Introduction to Industrial/Organizational Psychology. (3) The study of people at work; what motivates people to work and what leads to satisfaction, alienation, or performance; how to lead others; the structure of an organization and processes of communication, decision making, and conflict; socialization through selection and training; measurement of individual contributions; the design of work itself; ways to change; and develop entire organizations. (Fall, Spring)
PSYC 3001. Topics in Psychology. (3) Prerequisite: Permission of the instructor. Examination of special psychological topics. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. PSYC 3002. Topics in Psychological Research. (3)  Prerequisite: Permission of the instructor. Examination of special psychological topics. Preparation of one or more APA-style research papers required. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. PSYC 3110. Comparative Psychology. (3) Prerequisite: PSYC 1101. Animal and human behavior from a comparative point of view. Includes the study of methodology, and classification of behavior patterns, as well as the origin of these patterns. (Yearly)
PSYC 3111. Psychology of Learning. (3) Prerequisite: PSYC 1101. (Completion of PSYC 2102 is strongly recommended.) Major theories and empirical findings in the area of learning. (Yearly)
PSYC 3113. Physiological Psychology. (3) Prerequisite: PSYC 1101. The relationship of physiological systems to integrated behavior and an introduction to brain-behavior relationships. Emphasis on neural regulation of behavior. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PSYC 3114. Motivation. (3) Prerequisite: PSYC 1101. Current theories and research in the area of motivation. Consideration is given to the role of emotion in human motives. (Yearly)
PSYC 3115. Sensation and Perception. (3) Prerequisite: PSYC 1101. An introduction to the sensory and perceptual processes that provide the means to experience and make sense of the physical world in which we live. Topics include discussions of how sensory data are acquired, processed, and interpreted. (Yearly)
PSYC 3116. Human Cognitive Processes. (3) Prerequisite: PSYC 1101. Processes involved in such complex human behaviors as language (acquisition and usage), memory, and problem solving, with emphasis upon experimental findings and current theories. (Fall, Spring)
PSYC 3117. Hereditary Behavior. (3) Prerequisite: PSYC 1101. Genetic and environmental contributions to behavior and psychological processes. History of the nature-nurture issue in psychology; animal and human research methods; statistical analysis of behavior-genetic data; and the heritability of learning ability, intelligence, personality, and psychopathology. (Yearly)
PSYC 3118. Research Methods in Physiological Psychology. (4) Prerequisites: PSYC 1101 and permission of the instructor. Current laboratory techniques in physiological psychology, including basic surgeries, lesioning, stimulation, recording, and histology. Three lecture hours and one two-hour laboratory period a week. (On demand)
PSYC 3122. Cognitive and Language Development. (3) Prerequisites: PSYC 1101 and 2120. Theory and research on the development of thought and language in children, including such topics as theories of cognitive development, the development of perception, representation of knowledge, memory, language, and problem solving. (Alternate years)
PSYC 3123. Social and Personality Development. (3) Prerequisites: PSYC 1101 and 2120. Social and personality development of children, including such topics as infant social behavior, socialization practices, independence and achievement, aggression, sex-role development, and moral development. (Alternate years)
PSYC 3125. Older Worker and Retirement. (3)  Prerequisite: Permission of the instructor. Physical characteristics, personal attitudes, and structural factors affecting the employment of persons over 40. Topics include biological aging, myths and stereotypes about older workers, public policies, human resources practices, economics of retirement, and theories about career and life stages. (Alternate years)
PSYC 3126. Psychology of Women. (3) Cross-listed as WGST 3226. Prerequisite: PSYC 1101. Application of research in developmental, experimental, and clinical psychology to issues regarding women and gender. Includes such topics as gender-role development, gender differences in cognitive abilities and performance, psychological perspectives on women’s physical and mental health, and violence toward women. (Spring)
PSYC 3130. Social Psychology. (3) Prerequisite: PSYC 1101. The social behavior of individuals. Topics include interpersonal attraction and relationship development; attitude change; social conflict; social interaction; social perception; and social influence processes; general theories of social behavior; and research approaches. (Fall, Spring)
PSYC 3135. Psychology of Personality. (3) Prerequisite: PSYC 1101. Current personality theories. Consideration given to psychoanalytic, physiological, trait and factor, the perceptual viewpoints in the light of contemporary research. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PSYC 3140. Basic Processes in Psychological Assessment. (3) Prerequisites: PSYC 1101 and 1101L, and STAT 1222; PSYC 2102 recommended. Psychological testing, including scaling procedures, reliability and validity, correlational techniques used in test construction, a review of various kinds of psychological tests, and basic approaches to test interpretation. (Yearly)
PSYC 3151. Abnormal Psychology. (3) Prerequisite: PSYC 1101. A history of psychopathology. Case studies, differential diagnosis, psychological dynamics of abnormal behavior, including theoretical, clinical, and experimental contributions in the field. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PSYC 3152. Child Psychopathology. (3) Prerequisites: PSYC 1101, 2120 and 3151. Principles of classification, assessment and treatment of children and adolescents who display deviant affective, cognitive, and social behavior. (Alternate years)
PSYC 3155. Community Psychology. (3) Social forces, particularly within the context of organizations and/or communities, that affect the development of psychopathology and/or personal competency, with emphasis on preventing psychopathology and increasing competency. Topics include the concept of prevention; assessment of organizations, communities, and other environments; methods of instituting organizational and community change; evaluating the effects of community interventions; social policy analysis; and ethical issues involved in community work. (Yearly)
PSYC 3172. Psychology of Personnel: Employee Selection and Classification. (3) Prerequisite: PSYC 2171 or permission of instructor. Methods, techniques, and procedures used to select and classify employees. (Fall)
PSYC 3173. Psychological Bases of Training Programs. (3) Prerequisites: PSYC 1101 and 2171, or permission of instructor. Application of alternative theories about adult learning to the development and conduct of training programs in industry. Topics include how to develop training needs, a description of methods available to trainers such as programmed instruction and sensitivity training, and how to evaluate the effects of various training techniques. (Spring)
PSYC 3174. Organizational Psychology. (3) Prerequisite: PSYC 2171. Application of psychological principles to group and organizational levels of analysis, with emphasis on work teams and business organizations. Topics include group dynamics, teams and empowerment, organizational culture and diversity, and organization development and change. (Spring and Some Summers)
PSYC 3216. Introduction to Cognitive Science (3) Cross-listed as ITCS 3216. Prerequisite: Permission of the department. Interdisciplinary introduction to the science of the mind. Broad coverage of such topics as philosophy of mind; human memory processes; reasoning and problem solving; artificial intelligence; language processing (human and machine); neural structures and processes; and vision. (Spring, Alternate years)
PSYC 3313. Neuropsychology. (3) Prerequisite: PSYC 3113 or equivalent. Brain function and behavior, especially in individuals believed to be brain damaged (e.g., by stroke, Alzheimer’s, or head injury); general principles of brain function and of human neuropsychology, including higher functions (e.g., memory and language); and neuropsychological assessment. (Yearly)
PSYC 3316. Cognitive Neuroscience. (3) Prerequisite: PSYC 3113 or 3116 or equivalent. Biological basis of consciousness and the neurobiology of mental processes by which we perceive, act, learn, and remember; representation of mental processes from electrophysiological and brain imaging techniques, clinical neurology, and computational science. (Yearly)
PSYC 3405. Practicum in Applied Psychology. (1-4) Prerequisites: junior standing, permission of the instructor, and the Psychology department. Work in practical settings related to psychology under the supervision of a faculty member. May be repeated for credit with departmental permission. The student must have obtained approval in the semester preceding the semester in which the practicum is to be taken. Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. (Fall, Spring)
PSYC 3806. Individual Studies in Psychology. (1-4) Prerequisites: permission of the instructor and the department. Directed individual study that may take the form of initiating, designing and conducting an original research problem, or a critique and synthesis of existing research. May be repeated for credit. The student must have obtained approval in the semester preceding the semester in which the course is to be taken. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PSYC 4140. Tests and Measurements. (3) Prerequisite: PSYC 1101. Psychological and educational measurements in current use with emphasis on structure, administration and application of group tests. Individual tests such as Stanford-Binet, WISC and WAIS will be reviewed. (On demand)
PSYC 4152. Psychology of Exceptional Children. (3) Assessing and treating the exceptional child. Emphasis on current research in several diagnostic categories, including the emotionally disturbed, learning disabled, mentally retarded, physically handicapped and gifted. (On demand)
PSYC 4603. History and Systems of Psychology. (3) Prerequisites: PSYC 1101, at least 9 hours of psychology courses beyond the 1000 level, senior standing, and permission of department. Historical antecedents and origins of modern psychology. Emphasis on influential psychological systems such as behaviorism and psychoanalysis. May be used in fulfillment of the capstone requirement for the degree. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PSYC 4606. Advanced Topics in Psychology. (3) Prerequisites: PSYC 1101, PSYC 2102, senior standing, and permission of department. Examination of special psychological topics. May be used in fulfillment of the capstone requirement for the degree. (On demand)
PSYC 4612. Seminar in Behavior Modification. (3) Prerequisites: PSYC 2102, 2112 and 3112. Current issues in behavior modification, including an integration of principles, techniques and practical experiences. Emphasizes development of written and oral communication skills. (On demand)
PSYC 4613. Seminar in Physiological Psychology. (3) (W, O) Prerequisites: PSYC 2102 with a grade of C or better and permission of the department. PSYC 3113 or equivalent recommended. Intensive study of selected topics in physiological psychology, such as psychopharmacology, biofeedback and self-regulation, and sleeping and waking. Emphasizes development of written and oral communication skills. (Yearly)
PSYC 4619. Seminar in Experimental Psychology. (3) (W, O) Prerequisites: PSYC 2102 with a grade of C or better and permission of the department. In-depth examination of an area of current concern in the psychological laboratory. Each semester will have a different focus such as discrimination, learning, memory, experimental analysis of behavior and attention. Emphasizes development of written and oral communication skills. (Yearly)
PSYC 4625. Seminar in Developmental Psychology. (3) (W, O) Prerequisites: PSYC 2102 with a grade of C or better permission of the department, and either 2120, 2121, or 2124. Concentrated examination of selected current issues and research in a field of developmental psychology. Emphasizes development of written and oral communication skills. (Yearly)
PSYC 4630. Seminar in Social Psychology. (3) (W, O) Prerequisites: PSYC 2102 with a grade of C or better, PSYC 3130, and permission of the department. Intensive study at the advanced level of topics of current research and theoretical interest in social psychology. Emphasizes development of written and oral communication skills. (Yearly)
PSYC 4650. Seminar in Human Adaptation and Behavior. (3) (W, O) Prerequisites: PSYC 2102 with a grade of C or better, and permission of the department. Intensive reading and discussion in selected areas of psychology, such as stress, personality, emotions and psychopathology. Emphasizes development of written and oral communication skills. (Yearly)
PSYC 4655. Seminar in Community Psychology. (3) (W, O) Prerequisites: PSYC 2102 with a grade of C or better, 2150, 3151, and permission of the department. Application of psychological research findings to specific problems in the community with emphasis on problems hypothesized directly to affect psychological well-being. Emphasizes development of written and oral communication skills. (Yearly)
PSYC 4660. Seminar in Health Psychology. (3) (W, O) Prerequisite: PSYC 2102 with a grade of C or better, and permission of the department. Detailed examination of issues relevant to health and behavior. Readings and discussion of health-related concepts and controversies current in the professional literature. Emphasizes development of written and oral communication skills. (Yearly)
PSYC 4670. Seminar in Industrial Psychology. (3) (W, O) Prerequisites: PSYC 2102 with a grade of C or better, 2171, and permission of department. Topics of current concern in industrial/organizational psychology and related disciplines including issues that affect individuals at work and organizations in society. Emphasizes development of written and oral communication skills. (Yearly)
PSYC 4690. Honors Thesis I. (3) Prerequisite: Permission of instructor. Initiation of independent Honors research, including the preparation and defense of a formal thesis proposal. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
PSYC 4691. Honors Thesis II. (3)  Prerequisite: PSYC 3790. Completion of independent Honors research, including the preparation and defense of a formal Honors thesis. May be used in fulfillment of the capstone requirement for the degree. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
READ 3224. Teaching Reading to Primary Level Learners. (3)  Prerequisite: Admission to Teacher Education. Research, theory, and instructional practice related to the reading process and reading instruction in the elementary school with a focus on assessment of emergent reading behaviors; language development and reading; phonics and phonemic awareness; balanced literacy; and meeting the needs of diverse learners. Includes an extensive field-based component. (Fall, Spring)
READ 3226. Teaching Reading to Intermediate Grade Learners. (3)  Prerequisite: Admission to Teacher Education. Research, theory, and instructional practice related to integrating the communication processes with all subject areas, vocabulary, comprehension, study skills, authentic, assessment374 based instruction, addressing the needs of diverse and struggling readers. Includes an extensive, fieldbased component. (Fall, Spring)
READ 3255. Integrating Reading and Writing Across Content Area. (3)  Prerequisite: Admission to Teacher Education. Theories, research, and instructional methods, associated with reading and writing in the content areas of the middle and secondary school curriculum. Includes an extensive field-based component. (Fall, Spring)
RELS 1101. An Introduction to Religious Studies. (3)  An introduction to the study of the religious dimensions of human existence. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
RELS 1120. The Bible and its Interpreters. (3) An introduction to the history of biblical interpretation from the pre-canonical era to the present. (Yearly)
RELS 2000. Topics in Religious Studies. (1-3) Credit hours vary with topics. Special topics in Religious Studies. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (On demand)
RELS 2101. Introduction to Western Religions. (3) An introduction to Judaism, Christianity, Islam and other selected religions. Emphasis on the myths, stories, symbols, rituals, ideas, and ethical practices of these religions in their classical formulations and in their contemporary practices. (Fall, Spring) (Evenings)
RELS 2102. Introduction to Asian Religions. (3) An introduction to Hinduism, Buddhism, and other selected religions such as Confucianism, Daoism, and Islam. Emphasis on the myths, stories, symbols, rituals, ideas, and ethical practices of these religions in their classical formulations and in their contemporary practices. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
RELS 2104. Hebrew Scriptures/Old Testament. (3) The Hebrew religious tradition from the perspective of its development in the culture of the ancient Near East. (Yearly)
RELS 2105. New Testament and Christian Origins. (3) Emergence of Christianity in its cultural context. Analysis of selected early Christian writings in English translation. (Fall, Spring)
RELS 2108. Religion in American Culture. (3) The role of religion in the shaping of American culture. (Fall, Spring)
RELS 2110. Judaism. (3) The development of Jewish religious thought from antiquity to the present. (Yearly)
RELS 2120. Christianity. (3) The world-wide development of the thought and practices of diverse Christian traditions from antiquity to the present. (Yearly)
RELS 2131. Islam. (3) The development of the traditions in Islam with emphasis on Islamic culture, literature, and mysticism. (Yearly)
RELS 2154. Hinduism. (3) The ancient Vedic traditions and the development of Hinduism. Emphasis is on the role of Hinduism in Indian civilization. (Alternate years)
RELS 2157. Buddhism. (3) The historical development of Buddhism with special attention given to its diverse manifestations in South Asia. (On demand)
RELS 2166. Taoism. (3) Philosophical Taoism as nature mysticism. Comparison with nature mystics in the West. (Alternate years)
RELS 2216. The Modern Middle East. (3) Crosslisted as HIST 2216. An introduction to the history of this important and dynamic region. The course focuses on the issues that have defined the Middle East in the recent past and provides students with the historical context needed to understand the region, its peoples, and its conflicts in greater depth. (Fall)
RELS 2600. Approaches to the Study of Religion. (3)  Required of all majors as early in their program as possible. Examines basic concepts, theories, and approaches that are involved in the critical, academic study of religion. Attention given to basic research materials and to standard writing practices in the discipline. Majors only. (Fall, Spring)
RELS 3000. Topics in Religious Studies. (3) Treatment of a special topic in religious studies. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. Same as RELS 3001, but does not fulfill the General Education writing goal. (On demand)
RELS 3001. Topics in Religious Studies – Writing Intensive. (3)  Treatment of a special topic in religious studies. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. Same as RELS 3001, but fulfills the General Education writing goal. (On demand)
RELS 3050. Topics in Religion and Modern Culture. (3) Treatment of a special topic in religion and modern culture. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (Yearly)
RELS 3101. Greek Myths and Religions. (3) The gods and goddesses, heroes and heroines in ancient Greek myths and religions; Greek myth and later Western religions; polytheism and monotheism; functions of myth; and contemporary interpretations of Greek myth. (Yearly)
RELS 3104. Prophecy and Prophetic Literature in Ancient Israel. (3) Prerequisite: RELS 2104 or permission of the instructor. An examination of the phenomenon of prophecy in the religion of ancient Israel, with particular attention devoted to the writings about and writings attributed to named prophets in the Hebrew Bible. (On demand)
RELS 3107. The Psalms and Wisdom Literature of Israel. (3) Prerequisite: RELS 2104 or permission of the instructor. The origin and content of the Psalms and the place of wisdom literature in the development of Hebrew thought. (On demand)
RELS 3111. Women in Judaism. (3) Cross-listed as WGST 3111. A survey of the roles and activities in Jewish women throughout Jewish history, as it is portrayed in a diverse sampling of Jewish religious literature and practice. (Alternate years)
RELS 3113. Jesus. (3) Recommended: RELS 2105. Jesus and the religion he taught from the point of view of the synoptic gospels. (Alternate years)
RELS 3116. Paul. (3) The writings of St. Paul. The occasion, purpose and significance of each letter for the emerging Christian community. (Alternate years)
RELS 3122. Esoteric Traditions. (3) The study of one or more particular expressions of religious esotericism (e.g., Jewish Kabbalah; Hindu Tantra; etc.). May be repeated for credit when the subject matter changes. (On demand)
RELS 3129. Christian Controversies. (3) An exploration of Christian responses to ethical, cultural, political, and theological conflicts. The issues are selected to represent a range of time periods in the history of various Christian traditions. (Alternate years)
RELS 3135. Religion in Nineteenth-Century America. (3) Examination of religious thought, practices, and movements in 19th-century America. (On demand)
RELS 3137. Contemporary African-American Religions. (3) This course is designed to introduce students to the evolution of black religious thought and culture in American during the 20th century. It emphasizes the rise of the Black Church and its expanding role within black urban communities in America. Another component of the course addresses the emergence of other religious belief systems in contemporary Black culture such as Voodoo, Santeria, Spiritist churches, the Nation of Islam and even Black Judaism. Issues of race, class, gender, identity, and violence will be points of discussion in light of black religious life. RELS 3150. African-American Church and Civil Rights. (3) Cross-listed as AFRS 3150. Role of the African-American church in the struggle for human equality. Topics such as radical, moderate, and accommodationist leadership styles; historical development of the black church in the South; and its emergence as a foundation for modern civil rights movement. (On demand)
RELS 3163. The Religious Art and Architecture of India. (3) The visual art of Hindus, Buddhists, Jainas, and Muslims in the architecture, paintings, and sculptures of India. (Yearly)
RELS 3169. Zen Buddhism. (3) Buddhist origins in India, development of the Ch'an (Zen) school in China and Japan, and emphasis on the formative influences of Zen on Japanese art and culture. (Alternate years)
RELS 3209. Quest in Literature. (3) The spiritual dimension of contemporary and traditional literature. Focus may be on an artist, genre (novel, poetry, drama), or theme. (On demand)
RELS 3212. Films and Identity. (3)  Themes of religious identity, alienation, search, discovery, sexuality and death as reflected in recent American movies and foreign films. Film laboratory required. (On demand)
RELS 3242. Philosophy of Religion. (3) Cross-listed as PHIL 3242. Philosophical implications of religious experience, including the definitions, development, and diverse forms of the problems of belief and reason in modern thought. (On demand)
RELS 3400. Applied Research/Field Work. (3) Prerequisite: major or minor in Religious Studies, 9 earned hours in religious studies, and permission of the instructor. Research and in-service training in business or community-based organizations. Specific content based on contract between student, supervising professor and cooperating organization. (Approximately 120 contact hours for the semester)
RELS 3450. Study Abroad for Religious Studies Majors. (3-6) Prerequisite: Permission of the department. The examination of an approved topic in the context of study abroad. (On demand)
RELS 4000. Topics in Religious Studies. (3) Prerequisite: Permission of the instructor. May be repeated for credit. (On demand)
RELS 4010. Major Figure in Religious Studies. (3)  The life and works of a major figure who has contributed to religious studies. May be repeated for credit for different figures. (On demand)
RELS 4050. Topics in Religion and Modern Culture. (3) Treatment of a special topic in religion and modern culture. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (Yearly)
RELS 4101. Religion and Modern Thought. (3) The interaction of modern thought and modern religious sensibilities. (Alternate years)
RELS 4107. Early Judaism. (3) Prerequisite: RELS 2104 or 2105 or 3110 or permission of the instructor. Comparative historical and literary study of the varieties of Judaism evidenced during late antiquity (circa 70-640 C.E.), with special attention devoted to the information and development of rabbinic Judaism. (On demand)
RELS 4108. Medieval Judaism. (3) Prerequisite: RELS 2104 or 3110 or permission of the instructor. Comparative historical and literary study of the varieties of Judaism evidenced in Western Europe, the Byzantine Empire, and Islamicate realms from approximately 640 C.E. to approximately 1492 C.E. (On demand)
RELS 4109. Modern Judaism. (3) Prerequisites: RELS 3110 or 4107 or 4108 or permission of the instructor. Historical and conceptual study of Judaism and Jewish experience in Europe, America, and Israel, from the 16th century to the present, with special attention paid to the development of denominations, Zionism, and the Holocaust. (On demand)
RELS 4110. Contemporary Jewish Thought. (3) An examination of philosophy, religion, morality, politics, sociality, culture, family, and self-identity, in the light of modern and recent Jewish thought. (Alternate years)
RELS 4121. Medieval and Reformation Christianity. (3) An examination of Christian thought and practice from the early Middle Ages (c. 500 CE) through the reformations of the sixteenth century. (Alternate years)
RELS 4127. Material Christianity. (3) An examination of the ways individuals and groups throughout the Christian tradition have invested material objects with sanctity and power. Much of the course will be devoted to exploring theoretical models and theological warrants for practices related to objects. (Alternate years)
RELS 4201. Religion, Morality, and Justice. (3) Explore the ethical and social dimensions of selected religious traditions in their cultural contexts. (On demand)
RELS 4600. Senior Seminar. (3) (W, O) Required of majors in final year of studies. (Fall, Spring)
RELS 4800. Independent Studies. (1-3) Prerequisite: permission of the instructor. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
RESP 3101. Professional Roles & Dimensions of Respiratory Therapy. (3) Prerequisite: Admittance into RT program. This course encompasses an introduction to the history, trends, issues, and evolution of the respiratory therapy profession. The course includes an overview of selected respiratory theories and an analysis of the professional environment for the current and future practice of respiratory care. Topics and emphasis may vary. (Fall)
RESP 3102. Outpatient Services in Respiratory Therapy. (3) Prerequisite: Admittance into RT program. Corequisite: RESP 3101. This course encompasses an introduction to the history, trends, issues, and evolution of the outpatient services and reimbursement and the respiratory therapy profession. The course includes selected respiratory care theories and practices in alternate-care sites including pulmonary diagnostics, pulmonary rehabilitation, home care, sub-acute care. Topics and emphasis may vary. (Fall)
RESP 3103. Advanced Pharmacology in Respiratory Therapy. (3) Prerequisite: Admittance into RT program. Corequisite: RESP 3101. This course builds upon a basic understanding of the concepts and principles of pharmacology as applied in the respiratory therapy in the management of patient with cardiopulmonary disease and critical care. (Fall)
RESP 3104. Advanced Critical Care Pathophysiology. (3) Prerequisite: Admittance into RT program. Corequisite: RESP 3101. A survey of the disease processes which affect the tissues, organs or body as a whole. Special emphasis is placed on infectious diseases, their causes, prevention and treatment in the critical care setting. (Fall)
RESP 3105. Advanced Critical Care Monitoring. (3) Prerequisite: Admittance into RT program. Corequisite: RESP 3101. This course is a study of advanced cardiopulmonary monitoring used with critical care patients. Topics include but not limited to hemodynamic monitoring, mechanical ventilator waveform graphic analysis, and capnography. (Fall)
RESP 4101. Program Design, Implementation, and Outcomes Evaluation. (3) Prerequisite: Completion of all 3000-level courses. Evidence-based methods and techniques to design, implement, and evaluate healthcare quality control/improvement initiatives, and patient and population education programs. (Spring)
RESP 4102. Program Administration. (3)  Prerequisite: Completion of all 3000 level courses. Administration, financial, human resource, legal, and policy concepts and issues in outpatient, inpatient, public, and private sector settings. Topics and emphases may vary. (Fall)
RESP 4103. Evidence Based Practice in Respiratory Care. (3) Prerequisite: Admittance into RT program. Corequisite: Completion of all 3000 level courses. This course will provide the student with an introduction to the concept of evidence-based practice and an opportunity to acquire the skills necessary to be able to incorporate evidence and best practices into professional work. These include an understanding of research methods and the approach to critical appraisal of research literature. (Fall, On demand)
RESP 4104. Advanced Cardiopulmonary Physiology. (3) Prerequisite: Admittance into RT program. Corequisite: Completion of all 3000 level courses. Advanced physiology of the cardiovascular and pulmonary systems. This course includes study of respiratory physiology, cardiac and circulatory function with relevant clinical application of concepts in ECG interpretation, blood pressure regulation, gas exchange and transport, breathing regulation, respiratory insufficiency and congenital abnormalities. (Spring, On demand)
RESP 4111. Practicum. (9)  Prerequisites: RESP 4101, RESP 4102. This course includes experiences in a chosen focus area (clinical, administrative, or population-based). This experience will culminate in a capstone project in the form of research, or other scholarly activity that articulates the design, organization, statistics and data analysis used and includes an oral and written presentation of the project. (Spring)
RUSS 1201. Elementary Russian I. (4) Fundamentals of the Russian language, including speaking, listening comprehension, reading, and writing. (Fall)
RUSS 1202. Elementary Russian II. (4) Prerequisite: RUSS 1201. Fundamentals of the Russian language, including speaking, listening comprehension, reading, and writing. (Spring)
RUSS 2201. Intermediate Russian I. (4) Prerequisite: RUSS 1202 or permission of the department. Review of grammar, with conversation and composition based upon readings in Russian culture and civilization. (Fall)
RUSS 2202. Intermediate Russian II. (4) Prerequisite: RUSS 2201 or permission of the department. Continuation of grammar, conversation, and composition skills, based on readings in Russian literature. (Spring)
RUSS 3050. Masterpieces of Russian Literature. (3)  Prerequisite: sophomore standing. Conducted in English. No knowledge of Russian required. May be repeated as topic changes. (On demand)
RUSS 3201. Advanced Russian Grammar, Composition, and Conversation I. (3) Prerequisite: RUSS 2202 or permission of the department. Intensive review of Russian grammar, plus mastery of new grammatical structures, while performing written and oral task-oriented activities. Acquisition of new vocabulary in a cultural context. (Fall)
RUSS 3202. Advanced Russian Grammar, Composition and Conversation II. (3) Prerequisite: RUSS 3201 or permission of the department. Intensive practice of Russian grammar, speaking, and writing. Additional Russian civilization and culture as students improve their language skills. (Spring)
RUSS 3203. Russian Civilization and Culture. (3)  Conducted in English. No knowledge of Russian required. Geographical, historical, and artistic features of Russian culture, as well as aspects of life, thought, behavior, attitudes, and customs of the Russian-speaking people. Lectures, discussions, and viewing of films. (On demand)
RUSS 3800. Directed Individual Study. (1-4) Prerequisite: RUSS 3202 or permission of the department. To be arranged with the instructor. May be repeated for credit. (On demand)
SECD 3140. The Adolescent Learner. (3) Characteristics of the adolescent learner, including the impact on the classroom of physical, social, cognitive, moral, vocational, and affective developmental factors and multicultural issues. Field-based activities include observation and tutoring in school and non-school settings; 15 hours of field experiences. (Fall, Spring)
SECD 3141. Secondary Schools. (3) Prerequisite: admission to Teacher Education. Overview of secondary education with emphasis on the foundational components and instructional programs appropriate for contemporary adolescents in American society. Includes 15 hours of field experiences. (Fall, Spring)
SECD 3142. Issues in Secondary Education. (2) Prerequisite: admission to Teacher Education. Corequisites: EDUC 4291 and a content methods course. Integration of preservice education and academic concentration course work in a pre-studentteaching field experience. Students choose from sections of the course that focus on a contextual issue of particular interest while working in a setting where the issue exists. Students may take as many different Issues sections as their schedules permit. Includes 30 hours of field experiences. (On demand)
SECD 3800. Individual Study in Secondary Education. (1-6) Prerequisite: permission of the student’s advisor. Independent study under the supervision of an appropriate faculty member. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
SECD 4140. Adolescence and Secondary Schools. (3) Prerequisites: MDSK 2100 and admission to teacher education. Corequisite: MDSK 3151. Overview of secondary education, including the foundational components and instructional programs appropriate for contemporary adolescents in a diverse U.S. society. SECD 4451. Student Teaching/Seminar: 9-12 Secondary English. (12)  Prerequisite: Departmental permission for admission to student teaching. Corequisite: MDSK 4150. A planned sequence of experiences in the student’s area of specialization conducted in an approved school setting under the supervision and coordination of a university supervisor and a cooperating teacher. During student teaching the student must demonstrate the competencies identified for his/her specific teaching field in an appropriate grade level setting. Approximately 35-40 hours per week in an assigned school setting. Six-to-eight on-campus seminars scheduled throughout the semester. SECD 4452. Student Teaching/Seminar: 9-12 Secondary Math. (12)  Prerequisite: Departmental permission for admission to student teaching. Corequisite: MDSK 4150. A planned sequence of experiences in the student’s area of specialization conducted in an approved school setting under the supervision and coordination of a university supervisor and a cooperating teacher. During student teaching the student must demonstrate the competencies identified for his/her specific teaching field in an appropriate grade level setting. Approximately 35-40 hours per week in an assigned school setting. Six-to-eight on-campus seminars scheduled throughout the semester. SECD 4453. Student Teaching/Seminar: 9-12 Secondary Science. (12)  Prerequisite: Departmental permission for admission to student teaching. Corequisite: MDSK 4150. A planned sequence of experiences in the student’s area of specialization conducted in an approved school setting under the supervision and coordination of a university supervisor and a cooperating teacher. During student teaching the student must demonstrate the competencies identified for his/her specific teaching field in an appropriate grade level setting. Approximately 35-40 hours per week in an assigned school setting. Six-to-eight on-campus seminars scheduled throughout the semester. SECD 4454. Student Teaching/Seminar: 9-12 Secondary Social Studies. (12)  Prerequisite: Departmental permission for admission to student teaching. Corequisite: MDSK 4150. A planned sequence of experiences in the student’s area of specialization conducted in an approved school setting under the supervision and coordination of a university supervisor and a cooperating teacher. During student teaching the student must demonstrate the competencies identified for his/her specific teaching field in an appropriate grade level setting. Approximately 35-40 hours per week in an assigned school setting. Six-to-eight on-campus seminars scheduled throughout the semester. SECD 4472. Secondary Education Clinical Experience. (3) Program of learning activities in the student's area of academic concentration in an approved school setting. (On demand)
SEGR 2101. Systems Engineering Concepts. (3) Prerequisite: ENGRl202. This course provides the foundation for systems engineering processes and practices. The contents cover the discussion of current systems issues, basic systems engineering processes, and the roles of systems engineering professionals in a global business environment. It also will cover the principles of mechanical drawing and computer aided design(CAD) for systems engineering applications. (Fall)
SEGR 2105. Computational Methods for Systems Engineering I. (3) Prerequisite: SEGR 210l. This course will introduce programming languages and computational tools that are often used by Systems Engineers. Programming in C and Matlab will be emphasized. Spreadsheet-based modeling will be introduced . (Spring)
SEGR 2106. Engineering Economic Analysis. (3) Prerequisite: Sophomore standing or SEGR 2105 or permission of the department. Covers economic analysis of engineering alternatives, including time value of money, cash flow analysis, cost estimation, project evaluation, accounting and budgeting tools. (Fall)
SEGR 2111. Introduction to Engineering Management. (3) Prerequisite: ENGR 1202. Focuses on the fundamentals in engineering management. It provides students the understanding of engineering management principles and practices and the roles of engineering management professionals in a global business environment. (Spring)
SEGR 3101. System Design and Deployment. (3) Prerequisite: SEGR 2105 or permission of the department. Focuses on the basics of systems design, analysis, and implementation. It covers system design elements, system interface issues, system decomposition, and system integration. The emphasis is on the effective design and integration of system operations and successful deployment of systems design results. (Fall)
SEGR 3102. System Simulation, Modeling & Analysis. (3) Prerequisite: STAT 3128. Focuses on the study of discrete-event simulation and its use in the analysis and design of systems. The emphasis is on using simulation software for simulation modeling and analysis with practical applications to design, analysis, and improvement of diverse systems. (Spring)
SEGR 3103. Human System Interface. (3) Prerequisite: SEGR 2105 or permission of the department. Focuses on the interfacing issues between human, organization, and systems operations. The emphasis is on the influence of human and cultural factors related to the effectiveness of system operations in a global business environment. (Fall)
SEGR 3105. Computational Methods for Systems Engineering II. (3) Prerequisite: SEGR 2105. This course covers numerical techniques for systems engineers such as Polynomial interpolation, Numerical differentiation and integration, Newton and simple gradient methods for nonlinear equations. (Fall)
SEGR 3107. Decision and Risk Analysis. (3) Prerequisite: SEGR 2105 or permission of the department. This course aims to provide some useful tools for analyzing difficult decisions and making the right choice. After introducing components and challenges of decision making, the course will proceed with the discussion of structuring decisions using decision trees and influence diagrams. Decisions under conflicting objectives and multiple criteria will be covered as well as sensitivity and risk analysis. (Fall)
SEGR 3111. Project Management. (3) Prerequisite: STAT 3128. Focuses on the study of various aspects of project management techniques and issues, and the use of conceptual, analytical, and systems approaches in managing engineering projects and activities. It includes the development and writing of project plans and -reports for engineering and business operations. (Fall)
SEGR 3112. Value Engineering Management. (3) Prerequisite: SEGR 2106 or permission of the department. Analyzes the requirements of a project to achieve the highest performance for essential functions at the lowest costs over the life of the project. The "best value" is achieved by a multidisciplinary team effort through the study of alternative design concepts, materials, and methods. (spring)
SEGR 3114. Production Control Systems. (3) Prerequisite: statistics. Principles, analysis and design of production and inventory planning and control systems. Demand forecasting, production scheduling and control systems and introduction to CPM. (Fall)
SEGR 3122. Implementation of Logistics Systems and Supply Chains. (3) Prerequisite: SEGR 3121. This course reviews and analyzes real-life logistics and supply chain implementation cases. Different industry supply chains are compared and benchmarking is emphasized through review of industry best practices. (Spring)
SEGR 3131. Computer Aided Design & Manufacturing. (3) Prerequisite: SEGR 2101 or permission of the department. Focuses on the basics of hardware and software implementation in the design and manufacturing processes. The emphasis is in making the design and manufacturing processes effective and efficient for global business competition. (Fall)
SEGR 3132. Facilities Planning & Material Handling Systems. (3) Prerequisite: SEGR 2101 or permission of the department. Focuses on the basics in facility planning, plant layout design, material handling systems design and integration, and warehousing. The emphasis is on the effective design and integration of plant layout, material handling systems, and warehousing for supply chain operations. (Fall)
SEGR 3290. Systems Design Project I. (1) Prerequisite: SE senior standing; corequisite: SEGR 3111. First of a two-semester sequence leading to a major integrative system design experience in applying the principles of systems design and analysis and project management to the design of a system. Teamwork and communication skills are emphasized. It focuses on the development of the project plan and proposal for the capstone systems design project. Each student develops a complete systems design project plan and proposal and makes an oral presentation of the proposal to the faculty. It runs in conjunction with the project management course. (Fall)
SEGR 3291. Systems Design Project II. (3) Prerequisite: SEGR 3290. A continuation of SEGR 3290 for the execution of the proposed systems design project. This course includes a mid-term written progress report with an oral presentation and a final written report plus the final oral presentation to demonstrate project results. (Spring)
SEGR 4090. Special Topics. (1-6) Directed study of current topics of special interest. SEGR 4101. Network Modeling & Analysis. (3) Prerequisite: OPRS 3111 or SEGR 3106. This course covers formulation and solution of optimization problems using network flow algorithms. Topics include minimum flow problems shortest path, maximum flow, transportation, assignment, minimum spanning trees. Efficient solution algorithms are investigated. (Spring)
SEGR 4131. Product and Process Design. (3) Prerequisite: SEGR 2l0l or permission of the department. Focuses on how to achieve a highquality, customer-oriented product development process, from technology and product innovation, to design and development, leading up to production. Design for Six Sigma (DFSS) is the main technology discussed plus other product design approaches, such as design for cost, design for safety, and design for environment. (Spring)
SEGR 4132. Automation & Systems Design. (3) Prerequisite: SEGR 3132. Focuses on the concepts of systems design, manufacturing systems design, manufacturing process control, shop floor control, and automation. The emphasis is on automation for economic and flexible manufacturing operations that can handle frequently changing global manufacturing requirements. (Spring)
SEGR 4133. Lean Manufacturing Systems. (3) Prerequisite: SEGR 3132. Focuses on the fundamentals of how manufacturing operations work, and talk about the latest techniques to make your manufacturing organization successful. This course discusses how lean methodology can eliminate waste and increase the speed in manufacturing while reducing cycle times. (Spring)
SEGR 4142. Reliability Management. (3) Prerequisite: STAT 3128. Focuses on measuring, evaluating, improving and managing reliability. Topics include basic reliability models, hazard rate functions, system reliability, and fault tree analysis. (Spring)
SEGR 4952. Engineering System Optimization. (3) Prerequisite: Senior standing and OPRS 3111. A systems engineering approach will be followed to analyze practical applications from different engineering disciplines and to optimize complex systems. Model formulation, sensitivity analysis, special cases, solutions using commercially available software applications and practical implementation considerations will be emphasized. (Fall)
SOCY 1101. Introduction to Sociology. (3) The sociological perspective and process; fundamental concepts, principles, and procedures. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
SOCY 2090. Topics in Sociology. (1-3) Examination of specialized topics. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. SOCY 2091. Topics in Sociology – Writing Intensive. (1-3)  Examination of specialized topics. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. SOCY 2100. Aging and the Lifecourse. (3) Crosslisted as GRNT 2100. An interdisciplinary curse that examines the phenomenon of aging and its consequences for society from a variety of perspectives. Students participate in lectures, discussions and service learning projects designed to give them a broad overview of the field of gerontology. Emphasis on the wide variation in the aging process and approaches to meeting the needs of the aging population. (Yearly)
SOCY 2107. Global Hip Hop. (3) Cross-listed as AFRS 2107. The development and growth of Hip Hop from a US inner city Black expressive culture to a global subaltern social movement. Examines cultural production in Hip Hop in relation to the contemporary global issues that focus on the youth, subalterns, and postcolonial experiences. SOCY 2112. Popular Culture. (3) Analysis of popular forms of everyday life in America: fashions, fads, entertainment trends, advertising, television programming, music, myths, stereotypes, and icons of mass-mediated culture. (Fall, Spring)
SOCY 2126. World Population Problems. (3)  Cross-listed as ANTH 2126. An examination of various world population “problems,” such as growth, migration, fertility, and population aging, in order to learn how cultural, political, economic, and environmental factors influence and are influenced by the population structure of a given society. (Alternate years)
SOCY 2132. Sociology of Marriage and the Family. (3) Cross-cultural examination of family; socialization and sex roles; love, dating, and mate selection; communication; sexuality; power and decision making; parenthood; childlessness; conflict and violence; divorce, remarriage, and stepfamilies; alternate lifestyles; and future family. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
SOCY 2133. Sociology of Marriage and Family – Writing Intensive. (3)  Cross-Cultural examination of family; socialization and sex roles; love, dating, and mate selection; communication; sexuality; power and decision making; parenthood; childlessness; conflict and violence; divorce, remarriage, and stepfamilies; alternative lifestyles; and future family. (On demand)
SOCY 2163. Sociology of Gender. (3)  Changing patterns of gender inequality; socialization and social structure as basis of gendered behavior, ideologies, and relationships. Alternative gender models and social movements as vehicles to diminishing gender inequality. (On demand)
SOCY 2171. Social Problems. (3) Contemporary social problems and consequences for American society. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
SOCY 3090. Topics in Sociology. (1-3) Prerequisite: SOCY 1101. Examination of specialized sociological topics. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. SOCY 3091. Topics in Sociology - Writing Intensive. (1-3)  Prerequisite: SOCY 1101. Examination of specialized sociological topics. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. SOCY 3110. American Minority Groups. (3) Prerequisite: SOCY 1101. Relations between dominant and minority groups; the establishment, maintenance, and decline of dominance involving racial, ethnic, and religious minorities. (Yearly)
SOCY 3132. Sociology of Sport. (3) Prerequisite: SOCY 1101 or permission of instructor. Dynamics and emergence of sport; reciprocal influence between sport and society; values, norms, and roles in sports. (On demand)
SOCY 3143. Social Movements. (3) Prerequisite: SOCY 1101. Analysis of collective behavior, ideology, development, and organizations of movements seeking or resisting change. (Yearly)
SOCY 3153. Evolution of Sociological Theory. (3) Prerequisite: SOCY 1101. Origins and evolution of fundamental sociological concepts and theories. (Fall, Spring)
SOCY 3154. Evolution of Sociological Theory – Writing Intensive. (3)  Prerequisite: SOCY 1101. Origins and evolution of fundamental sociological concepts and theories. (On demand)
SOCY 3161. Socialization and Society. (3) Prerequisite: SOCY 1101. Analysis and process of socialization, social interaction, and sociocultural dimension of personality. (Yearly)
SOCY 3173. Criminology. (3) Prerequisite: SOCY 1101. Nature and historical development of crime and political-economic organization of crime, criminal law, and theories of crime causation. (Fall, Spring)
SOCY 3175. Crowds, Riots, and Disasters. (3) Prerequisite: SOCY 1101. Collective behavior in everyday life; crowds, rumors, fads, fashion; collective behavior that disrupts social order; riots and responses to disaster; response of individuals, organizations and communities to natural disasters, e.g., floods, hurricanes, tornadoes, and earthquakes. (Yearly)
SOCY 3210. Black Families in the Diaspora. (3) Cross-listed as AFRS 3210 and LTAM 3110. This course is designed to acquaint students with historical and contemporary experiences of peoples of African descent in the Caribbean and Latin American countries with specific emphasis on family structure and family relationships. Includes discussion of theories, history, impact of globalization on family structure, roles of women and identity, socioeconomic status and mobility, slavery, colonialism, and capitalism. The course is designed to provide students with a better understanding of the comparative relationships and links between family structures and common life experiences among peoples of African descent in different parts of the world, with specific emphasis on the Caribbean and Latin American regions. (On demand)
SOCY 3250. Political Sociology. (3) Cross-listed as POLS 3250. Prerequisite: SOCY 1101. Sociological analysis of the relationship between social, economic and political systems. Focuses on power relations in society and its effects on the distribution of scarce resources. Topics covered may include: theories of power and the nation state, political participation and voting, religion and politics, the comparative welfare state, media and ideology, the global economy, war and genocide, revolutions, and social movements. Not open to students who have credit for SOCY 3251 or POLS 3251. (Yearly)
SOCY 3251. Political Sociology. (3)  Cross-listed as POLS 3251. Prerequisite: SOCY 1101. Sociological analysis of the relationship between social, economic and political systems. Focuses on power relations in society and its effects on the distribution of scarce resources. Topics covered may include: theories of power and the nation state, political participation and voting, religion and politics, the comparative welfare state, media and ideology, the global economy, war and genocide, revolutions, and social movements. Not open to students who have credit for SOCY 3250 or POLS 3250. (On demand)
SOCY 3261. Human Sexuality. (3) Prerequisite: SOCY 1101 or permission of instructor. Human sexuality research; teenage pregnancy; birth control; sex education; sexual fantasy; pornography; homosexuality and bisexuality; sexual communication; and heterosexual alternatives. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
SOCY 3267. Sociology of Dying, Death, and Bereavement. (3) Cross-listed as GRNT 3267. Social definitions of death, process of dying, facing death across the life course, grief, bereavement, bioethical issues impacting individuals and society. (Yearly)
SOCY 3895. Directed Individual Study. (1-4) Prerequisite: Permission of the instructor. Supervised investigation of a sociological topic. May be repeated for credit; up to six hours may be applied to the major. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
SOCY 4090. Topics in Sociology. (1-3) Prerequisite: SOCY 1101. Examination of specialized sociological topics. Examples: Sociology of religion, Modern Japan. May be repeated for credit. (On demand)
SOCY 4091. Topics in Sociology – Writing Intensive. (1-3)  Prerequisite: SOCY 1101. Examination of specialized sociological topics. Examples: Sociology of religion, Modern Japan. May be repeated for credit. (On demand)
SOCY 4110. Sociology of Aging. (3) Cross-listed as GRNT 4110. Prerequisite: SOCY 1101 or permission of the instructor. Study of the changing characteristics, aspirations, and needs of older adults and their impact upon such institutions as the family, work, the economy, politics, education, and health care; emphasis on sociological theories of aging, contemporary research, and the analysis of specific aging policies and programs. (Fall)
SOCY 4111. Social Inequality. (3) Prerequisite: SOCY 1101. Distribution of power, privilege, and prestige; correlates and consequences of inequality; national and international comparisons. (Yearly)
SOCY 4112. Sociology of Work. (3) Prerequisite: SOCY 1101 or permission of instructor. The emergence of post- industrial society and technological change in the workplace; analysis of their impacts on organizations, workers, family, and community. (Yearly)
SOCY 4124. Sociology of the Community. (3) Prerequisite: SOCY 1101. Concepts and methods of community analysis of planned and unplanned community change. (On demand)
SOCY 4125. Urban Sociology. (3) Prerequisite: SOCY 1101 or permission of the instructor. Cross cultural analysis of urban development, social structure, ecology, demographic composition, and social problems. (Yearly)
SOCY 4130. Sociology of Health and Illness. (3) Prerequisite: SOCY 1101 or permission of instructor. The cultural and structural influences on the definition of health and illness; models of illness behaviors; health demography and epidemiology; social influences on the delivery of health care; ethical issues surrounding health and illness; and the development of relevant social policy. (Yearly)
SOCY 4131. Family Policy. (3) Prerequisite: SOCY 1101 or permission of instructor. Critical analysis of four aspects of family policy: the historical and cultural factors that have resulted in specific policies affecting the family; the specification of contemporary family policy at both the national and state level; the intended and actual application of existing family policy; and the implications and impact of policies as they are interpreted and implemented. (On demand)
SOCY 4134. Families and Aging. (3) Cross-listed as GRNT 4134. Prerequisite: SOCY 1101 or permission of instructor. Theories explaining the formation and functioning of American families with emphasis on the impact of the aging of society. Examination of the current demographic trends and expectations of multigenerational families, as well as the future demands and modifications. (On demand)
SOCY 4135. Sociology of Education. (3) Prerequisite: SOCY 1101 or permission of the instructor. Educational institution; the school class as a social system; the school as a social environment and a complex organization. (Yearly)
SOCY 4150. Older Individual and Society. (3) Crosslisted as GRNT 4150. Study of the social and cultural context on the lives of aging individuals in American society. Will include a focus on expectations, social interactions, and psychological well-being in the context of retirement, caregiving, and health. (Yearly)
SOCY 4154. Contemporary Social Theory. (3) Prerequisite: SOCY 3153 or permission of instructor. Elements and process of theory construction; contemporary social theories, such as theories of social order and causation, power, class structure, and inequality; group process theories; post-modern theories. (On demand)
SOCY 4155. Sociological Research Methods. (4) Prerequisite: SOCY 1101. Formulation of research problems; research designs; social measurement; sampling; collection, analysis, and interpretation of data. Three hours of lecture/discussion and completion of weekly laboratory units. (Fall, Spring)
SOCY 4155L. Sociological Research Methods Laboratory. (0) Corequisite: SOCY 4155. Required weekly laboratory session for Sociological Research Methods. SOCY 4156. Quantitative Analysis. (4) Prerequisite: SOCY 1101. Concepts and procedures of sociological analysis; data processing; measurement theory; and quantitative models of analysis. Three hours of lecture/discussion and completion of weekly laboratory units. (Fall, Spring)
SOCY 4156L. Quantitative Analysis Laboratory. (0) Corequisite: SOCY 4156. Required weekly laboratory session for Quantitative Analysis. SOCY 4165. Sociology of Women. (3)  Crosslisted as WGST 4165. Prerequisite: SOCY 1101 or WGST 1101 and junior standing or permission of the instructor. Examines how the social world of women is influenced by their race, ethnicity, and class. Attention is given to changing roles of women in public and private spheres and to the role conflict that arises as women attempt to meet obligation in families, communities, and the workplace. (Yearly)
SOCY 4168. Sociology of Mental Health and Illness. (3)  Prerequisite: SOCY 1101 or permission of instructor. Mental health and illness in its social context; relationship between social structures and mental health/disorder. How social factors affect the definition and treatment of mental disorders; the effects of demographic variables on mental health and illness; the role of social support and stress; the organization, delivery and evaluation of mental health care services; and considerations of mental health care policy. (On demand)
SOCY 4172. Sociology of Deviant Behavior. (3) Prerequisite: SOCY 1101 or permission of instructor. Social definition of deviance; examination of the social processes producing unusual, non-standard, and condemned behavior; and social responses to deviant behavior. (Fall, Spring)
SOCY 4173. Sociology of Deviant Behavior – Writing Intensive. (3)  Prerequisite: SOCY 1101 or permission of instructor. Same as SOCY 4172, but a Writing Intensive  course. Social definition of deviance; examination of the social processes producing unusual, non-standard, and condemned behavior; and social responses to deviant behavior. (On demand)
SOCY 4263. Sociology of Small Groups. (3) (O, W) Prerequisite: SOCY 1101 or permission of instructor. Systematic analysis and application of theoretical and empirical research pertaining to small groups. (Yearly)
SOCY 4480. Internship in Sociology. (3-6) Prerequisite: Permission of the department. Research and/or in-service training for selected students in cooperating community organizations. Specified content based upon a contract between student, department, and community organization. May be repeated for credit up to six semester hours. Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
SOWK 1101. The Field of Social Work. (3) Historical development and philosophy of social work as a profession: personal and societal needs; methods and organizational arrangements; and roles and tasks of social workers. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
SOWK 2182. Human Behavior in the Social Environment I. (3) Prerequisite: BIOL 1110, SOCY 1101, and PSYC 1101. Prerequisite or corequisite: SOWK 1101. Human behavior and the social environment in relation to developmental theory and transitions across the life span. (Fall, Summer)
SOWK 2183. Human Behavior in the Social Environment II. (3) Prerequisite: SOWK 2182. Human behavior in the social environment in relation to interactions among individuals, families, communities, and larger social systems. (Spring, Summer)
SOWK 3090. Topics in Social Work. (1-3) Specialized topics in social work. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (A list of specific courses offered each term is available through campus course listings.) (Fall, Spring, Summer)
SOWK 3100. Social Work Research. (3) Prerequisite: Upper Division standing. Introduction to research methods and skills used in social work. (Fall)
SOWK 3120. Diversity and Populations-at-Risk. (3) Prerequisite: Upper Division standing. Issues of race, ethnicity, gender, sexual orientation, social class, age, and ability in social work practice. (Fall)
SOWK 3181. Practice Methods I. (3) Prerequisite: Upper Division standing. Corequisite: SOWK 3482, SOWK 3683. Generalist social work practice methods with an emphasis on working with individuals. (Fall)
SOWK 3182. Practice Methods II. (3) Prerequisite: Upper Division standing, SOWK 3181. Corequisite: SOWK 3483, SOWK 3685. Generalist social work practice methods with an emphasis on working with families and groups. (Spring)
SOWK 3184. Practice Methods III. (3) Prerequisite: Upper Division standing, SOWK 3181. Corequisite: SOWK 3484, SOWK 3685. Generalist social work practice methods with an emphasis on working with communities and large systems. (Spring)
SOWK 3201. Foundations of Social Welfare. (3)  Prerequisite: Upper Division standing. History of and current trends in social welfare; values and conflicts that influence social welfare programming. (Fall)
SOWK 3202. Social Welfare Policy. (3) Prerequisite: Upper Division standing and SOWK 3201. Nature and development of social welfare policy; implications of policy for program design and service delivery. (Spring)
SOWK 3482. Field Placement I. (6) Prerequisite: Upper Division standing. Corequisite: SOWK 3181. Directed field experience two days per week under supervision in selected community agencies. (Fall)
SOWK 3484. Field Placement II. (9) Prerequisite: Upper Division standing, SOWK 3181, SOWK 3482, SOWK 3683. A continuation of SOWK 3482, directed field experience three days per week under supervision in selected community agencies. (Spring)
SOWK 3683. Field Seminar I. (1)  Prerequisite: Upper Division standing. Corequisite: SOWK3181. Classroom analysis and discussion of the student field placement experience. (Fall)
SOWK 3685. Field Seminar II. (1)  Prerequisite: Upper Division standing, SOWK 3181, SOWK 3482, SOWK 3683. Corequisite: SOWK 3182, SOWK 3184. A Continuation of SOWK 3683, classroom analysis and discussion of the student field placement experience. (Spring)
SOWK 3895. Directed Individual Study. (1-4) Prerequisite: Permission of the department. Supervised investigation of a special problem or area of practice. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
SOWK 4100. Ethnicity and Aging. (3) Prerequisite: permission of the instructor. Examines the changing characteristics, goals, and needs of older African-Americans, Asian-Americans, Native Americans, and Hispanics. Provides a diversity of perspectives from which to view the relationship of ethnicity to aging including the impact of the family, work, education, economy, illness, behavior, and health care. (On demand)
SOWK 4101. Social Work Practice with Older Adults. (3) Prerequisite: Permission of the department. Social work practice with older adults with an emphasis on assessment, intervention planning, and implementation. (On demand)
SPAN 1201. Elementary Spanish I. (4) For students with limited or no previous experience in Spanish. First course in a two-course sequence to develop competence in culture, speaking and writing, listening and reading comprehension in Spanish. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
SPAN 1202. Elementary Spanish II. (4) Prerequisite: SPAN 1201 or equivalent. Second course in a two-course sequence to develop competence in culture, speaking and writing, listening and reading comprehension in Spanish. (Fall, Spring, Summer)(Evenings)
SPAN 2009. Hispanic Literature in English Translation. (3)  Studies of Spanish or Spanish American literature in translation. Not applicable toward Spanish major. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. Course conducted in English. (On demand)
SPAN 2050. Topics in Spanish. (1-3) Prerequisite: SPAN 1202 or permission of the department. Study of a particular facet of the Spanish language, culture or literature. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (On demand)
SPAN 2105. Spanish Communication Skills Development I. (3)  Prerequisite: SPAN 1202, recommended SPAN 2201 be taken concurrently. Fulfills the 2000-level language requirement for non Spanish majors. Continued practice in all four skills: speaking, listening, reading, writing. (Fall, Spring)
SPAN 2106. Spanish Communication Skills Development II. (3)  Prerequisite: SPAN 2201 or permission of the department; recommended SPAN 2202 be taken concurrently. Continued practice in all four skills: speaking, listening, reading, writing. (Fall, Spring)
SPAN 2200. Spanish for Reading Knowledge. (3) Prerequisite: SPAN 1202 or equivalent. Review of Spanish grammar with emphasis on developing reading skills. Taught primarily in English. Does not count for major or minor credit. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
SPAN 2201. Intermediate Spanish I. (3) Prerequisite: SPAN 1202 or permission of the department; recommended SPAN 2201L be taken concurrently. Continued training in grammar. Intensive practice in reading, writing, and speaking. (Fall, Spring)
SPAN 2202. Intermediate Spanish II. (3) Prerequisite: SPAN 2201 (2201L also recommended) or permission of the department; also recommended SPAN 2202L be taken concurrently. Builds on skills acquired in the first semester intermediate level. Introduces advanced grammatical concepts. (Fall, Spring)
SPAN 2210. Introduction to Spanish for Commerce. (3) Prerequisite: SPAN 1202 or permission of the department. Fundamentals of commercial Spanish, study of the language, protocol, and cultural environment of the Spanish-speaking business world. Basic business vocabulary, cultural concepts, and grammatical review through situational practice. Fulfills the 2000-level language requirement for non- Spanish majors. (Fall, Spring)
SPAN 2211. Spanish for Criminal Justice Professionals. (3) Prerequisite: SPAN 1202 or permission of the department. Fulfills the 2000-level language requirement for non-Spanish majors. (Fall, Spring)
SPAN 2212. Spanish for Health Care Professionals. (3) Prerequisite: SPAN 1202 or permission of the department. Fulfills the 2000-level language requirement for non-Spanish majors. (Fall, Spring)
SPAN 3009. Masterpieces of Hispanic Literature in English. (3)  Prerequisites: sophomore standing and ENGL 1102, or permission of instructor. Advanced studies of Spanish or Spanish-American literature in English translation. Knowledge of Spanish not required. Not applicable toward a Spanish major or minor. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. Course conducted in English. (On demand)
SPAN 3019. Hispanic Women Writers in English. (3)  Cross-listed as LTAM 3319 and WGST 3019. Prerequisite: ENGL 1102 and sophomore standing, or permission of instructor. Examination of prose and poetry by women writers from Spain and the Americas to understand women's voices and other cultures. Conducted in English. Knowledge of Spanish not required. Not applicable toward Spanish major or minor. (On demand)
SPAN 3029. Cultural Dimension of Doing Business with Spanish-Speaking Countries. (3) Prerequisite: ENGL 1102 or 1103. Development of cultural awareness for conducting business with Spanishspeaking countries and U.S. Hispanic communities. Conducted in English. Not applicable toward Spanish major or minor. (Alternate years)
SPAN 3030. Business and Culture in the Hispanic Caribbean Region. (3) Prerequisite: ENGL 1102 or 1103. Development of intercultural understanding and communication skills for conducting business in the greater Hispanic Caribbean region. Conducted in English. Not applicable toward Spanish major or minor. (Alternate years)
SPAN 3050. Topics in Spanish. (1-3) Prerequisite: SPAN 2202 or equivalent. Study of a particular facet of the Spanish language, culture, or literature at the 3000 level not covered by other SPAN courses. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (On demand)) SPAN 3160. Studies in Hispanic Film. (3) The study of Spanish Peninsular, Spanish American, or Hispanic/Latino films. Not applicable toward Spanish major or minor. Course conducted in English. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (Yearly)
SPAN 3201. Advanced Grammar and Composition. (3) Prerequisite: SPAN 2202 or permission of the department. Advanced studies in Spanish grammar, composition, syntax, and rhetoric. (Fall, Spring)
SPAN 3202. Advanced Conversation and Composition. (3) Prerequisite: SPAN 2202 or permission of the department. Study and practice of formal, academic presentations and reports both written and oral. Introduction to concepts in elocution and phonetics. (Fall, Spring)
SPAN 3203. Advanced Writing and Rhetoric for Native Speakers. (3) Prerequisites: SPAN 2202 or permission of the department; and student must be a native speaker of Spanish, as determined by the student’s advisor. Continued studies in Spanish grammar, composition, syntax, and rhetoric for academic purposes. Replaces SPAN 3202. (Fall)
SPAN 3208. Introduction to Literary Analysis. (3) Prerequisite or corequisite: SPAN 3201, 3202, or 3203 or permission of the department. Continued work with vocabulary building and reading skills. Introduction to the theory and practice of reading literary texts in Spanish. (Fall, Spring)
SPAN 3209. Spanish Civilization and Culture. (3) Prerequisite or corequisite: SPAN 3201, 3202, 3203 or permission of the department. Introduction to the cultural heritage of peninsular Spain. (Alternate semesters)
SPAN 3210. Spanish American Civilization and Culture. (3) Prerequisite or corequisite: SPAN 3201, 3202, 3203 or permission of department. Introduction to the cultural heritage of Spanish America. (Alternate semesters)
SPAN 3211. Introduction to Spanish Peninsular Literature. (3) Prerequisites: SPAN 3208 and SPAN 3201, 3202, 3203 or permission of the department. Introduction to the literary heritage of Spain. Reading and analysis of representative works. (Fall, Spring)
SPAN 3212. Introduction to Spanish American Literature. (3) Prerequisites: SPAN 3208 and SPAN 3201, 3202, 3203, or permission of the department. Introduction to the literary heritage of Spanish America. Reading and analysis of representative works. (Fall, Spring)
SPAN 3220. Spanish for Business and International Trade. (3) Prerequisites: SPAN 3201 or 3202 or 3203 or permission of the department. Introduction to spoken and written language of the Spanishspeaking business world. Acquisition of and practice with general commercial terminology used in Spanish for such functional business areas as economics, management, marketing, finance, and import-export. (Fall, Spring)
SPAN 3800. Directed Individual Study. (1-3) Prerequisite: permission of the department; normally open only to Spanish majors and minors. Individual work on a selected area of study. To be arranged with the instructor during the preceding semester. By special permission only. May be repeated for credit. (On demand)
SPAN 4050. Selected Topics in Spanish. (1-3) Prerequisites: two 3000-level courses or permission of the department. Consideration of a predetermined topic not covered by other SPAN courses. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (On demand)
SPAN 4120. Advanced Business Spanish I. (3) Prerequisites: SPAN 3201, 3202, or 3203 and SPAN 3220 or permission of the department. Advanced studies in Business Spanish, intensive intercultural communication practice in speaking, listening comprehension, reading, writing, and translation/interpretation in functional business areas such as economics, management, banking, accounting, real estate, office systems, and human resources. (Fall)
SPAN 4121. Advanced Business Spanish II. (3) Prerequisites: SPAN 3201, 3202, or 3203 and SPAN 3220 or permission of the department. Advanced studies in Business Spanish, intensive intercultural communication practice in speaking, listening comprehension, reading, writing, and translation in functional business areas such as goods and services, marketing, finance, and import-export. (Spring)
SPAN 4122. Studies in Advanced Business Spanish. (3) Cross-listed as LTAM 4322. Prerequisites: SPAN 3201, 3202, 3203 and SPAN 3220 or permission of the department. Advanced studies in special topics in Business Spanish (e.g., Tourism in Spain and Latin America, Free Trade in the Americas [NAFTA/TLCAN, Mercosur, The Andean Pact, CAFTA-DR], Socioeconomic Issues in the Greater Caribbean, Business and Technology in Latin America and Spain). May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (On demand)
SPAN 4201. Nineteenth-Century Spanish Literature. (3) Prerequisite: SPAN 3211, 3212, or permission of the department. Survey of peninsular literature from Costumbrismo through the Generation of 1898. (Alternate years)
SPAN 4202. Twentieth-Century Spanish Literature. (3) Prerequisite: SPAN 3211, 3212, or permission of the department. Treatment of major literary developments from the Generation of 1898 to present day. (Alternate years)
SPAN 4205. Novel of the Golden Age. (3) Prerequisites: SPAN 3211, 3212, or permission of the department. El Lazarillo through El Criticón. (Alternate years)
SPAN 4206. Theater of the Golden Age. (3) Prerequisite: SPAN 3211, 3212, or permission of the department. Study of works of the leading dramatists of the period. (Alternate years)
SPAN 4210. Studies in Spanish American Poetry. (3) Prerequisite: SPAN 3211, 3212, or permission of the department. Studies of colonial, post-independence, 20th-century, and contemporary Spanish American poetry. May be repeated for credit if topic varies. (Alternate years)
SPAN 4211. Studies in Spanish American Prose Fiction. (3) Prerequisites: SPAN 3211, 3212, or permission of the department. Studies of colonial, post-independence, 20th-century, and contemporary Spanish American prose fiction. May be repeated for credit if topic varies. (Alternate years)
SPAN 4212. Studies in Spanish American Theater. (3) Prerequisites: SPAN 3211, 3212, or permission of the department. Studies of colonial, postindependence, 20th-century, and contemporary Spanish American theater. May be repeated for credit if topic varies. (On demand)
SPAN 4213. Cervantes. (3) Prerequisites: SPAN 3211, 3212, or permission of the department. Study of Cervantes' masterpiece, Don Quijote, and/or other representative works. (Alternate years)
SPAN 4214. Studies in Hispanic Children’s Literature. (3) Cross-listed as LTAM 4314. Prerequisite: SPAN 3211 or 3212 or permission of the department. Literary works in Spanish written for children. May be repeated for credit if topic varies. (On demand)
SPAN 4215. Studies in Regional Literature of the Americas. (3) Cross-listed as LTAM 4315. Prerequisite: SPAN 3211, 3212, or permission of the department. Studies of Mexican, Central American, Caribbean, Andean, Amazonian, or Southern Cone literature. Readings from representative works. Works from non Spanish speaking areas read in Spanish translation. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (On demand)
SPAN 4216. Social, Political, Cultural, Economic Issues in Hispanic Literature. (3) Cross-listed as LTAM 4316. Prerequisite: SPAN 3211, 3212, or permission of the department. Contextual issues surrounding Hispanic literature. (On demand)
SPAN 4217. Topics in Hispanic Culture and Civilization. (3) Cross-listed as LTAM 4217. Prerequisite: SPAN 3211, 3212, or permission of the department. Various topics involving the fine arts: music, dance, art, film. May be repeated for credit if topic varies. Applicable toward Spanish major or minor only when taught in Spanish. (On demand)
SPAN 4231. Spanish Phonetics. (3) Prerequisite: Two courses at the 3000-level or permission of the department. Detailed analysis, description, and production of Spanish sounds. Practical exercises with phonetic transcription and recordings. (On demand)
SPAN 4232. Spanish Linguistics. (3) Prerequisites: two courses at the 3000-level. Introduction to different fields of Spanish linguistics studies: sociolinguistics, synchronic and diachronic perspectives of phonetics, morphology, syntax, and semantics. (On demand)
SPAN 4233. History of the Spanish Language. (3) Prerequisites: two courses at the 3000-level. Strongly recommended to have completed SPAN 4232. The evolution of Spanish from Latin and the effects of this evolution on Spanish phonetics, morphology, syntax, and semantics . (On demand)
SPAN 4400. Honor’s Thesis. (3) Prerequisite: at least 21 hours of Spanish at the 3000-level and above completed with a 3.5 GPA. Directed research and writing of an Honor’s thesis. (On demand)
SPAN 4410. Professional Internship in Spanish. (1-6) Prerequisite: Honors status or permission of the department. Faculty-supervised field and/or research experience in a cooperating profession (e.g., business)
SPAN 4800. Directed Individual Study. (1-3) Prerequisite: permission of the department; normally open only to Spanish majors and minors. Individual work on a selected area of study. To be arranged with the instructor, generally during the preceding semester. By special permission only. May be repeated for credit. (On demand)
SPED 2100. Introduction to Students with Special Needs. (3) Characteristics of students with special learning needs, including those who are gifted and those who experience academic, social, emotional, physical, and developmental disabilities. Legal, historical, and philosophical foundations of special education and current issues in providing appropriate educational services to students with special needs. Field-based clinical activity required. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
SPED 3100. Introduction to General Curriculum for Students with Special Needs. (3) Prerequisite: Admission to Teacher Education. Examines legislation and litigation that govern and/or influence services for individuals with disabilities. Scrutinizes the IEP process and investigates IEP objectives that reflect the general curriculum standards. Examines one’s personal philosophy of education, which reflects the diversity students with disabilities. Identifies services, networks, organizations, and publications that serve or are relevant to individuals with disabilities. Identifies and critiques instructional implications of published research. (Fall)
SPED 3173. Special Education Assessment. (3) Prerequisite: Admission to Teacher Education. Fundamental concepts and skills in special education assessment for individuals with exceptional learning needs including curriculum-based assessment, curriculum-based measurement, and formal/standardized assessment. Requires two-hours of clinical field-based assignments each week for 10 weeks. (Fall)
SPED 3175. Instructional Planning in Special Education. (3) Prerequisite: Admission to Teacher Education. Strategies for the development, implementation, and monitoring of Individualized Education Plans (IEPs) for students with mild disabilities within the General Education curriculum. Through the use of technology, students are expected to demonstrate proficiency in using the General Education curriculum to develop and implement IEPs, unit, and individual lesson plans for instruction. (Fall)
SPED 3800. Individual Study in Special Education. (1-6) Prerequisite: permission of the student’s advisor. Independent study under the supervision of an appropriate faculty member. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
SPED 4000. Topics in Special Education. (1-6) May include classroom and/or clinical experiences in the content area. With department approval, may be repeated for credit for different topics. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
SPED 4111. Issues in Early Intervention for Children with Disabilities. (3) Prerequisite: Admission to Teacher Education. Current issues and trends in early intervention and preschool services for young children with disabilities and their families. Includes site visits scheduled throughout the semester. (Fall, Summer)
SPED 4112. Assessment of Young Children with Disabilities: B-K. (3) Prerequisite or corequisite: SPED 4111, GPA of at least 2.5 overall, and admission to Teacher Education. Strategies for interdisciplinary developmental assessments to identify needs and plan appropriate intervention programs for young children with disabilities and their families. Approximately 20 hours of field experience. (Fall)
SPED 4170. Special Education: Consultation and Collaboration.  (3) Prerequisite: Admission to Teacher Education. The course is designed to provide students an opportunity to develop their knowledge base and expertise in consultation and collaboration with parents, General Education teachers, paraprofessionals, related service personnel, and/or human service personnel. A field-based clinical assignment of approximately 10 hours is required. (Spring)
SPED 4210. Instructional Methods and Materials: BK. (3) Prerequisite: Admission to Teacher Education, SPED 4111, SPED 4112. Goal-setting, instructional design, and strategies for teaching young children with disabilities and their families. Includes a fieldbased assignment of approximately 20 hours. (Spring)
SPED 4211. Nature and Needs of Gifted Children. (3) Prerequisite: admission to Teacher Education. Examination of the historical and philosophical perspectives of education for gifted and talented learners with emphasis on answering the question, "What is giftedness?" Issues explored in the course include identification procedures, instructional options, the nature of intelligence and creativity, laws/policies, psychological and emotional correlates of talent, and current research findings. (On demand)
SPED 4270. Classroom Management. (3) Prerequisite: Admission to Teacher Education. Theoretical context of positive behavioral support and related applied behavior analysis strategies, including functional behavioral assessment and intervention planning, necessary to manage effectively the classroom behaviors of individuals or groups of students with special needs and to promote success in the learning environment. A field-based clinical assignment of approximately 15 hours is required. (Spring)
SPED 4271. Systematic Instruction in the Adapted Curriculum. (3) Prerequisite: Admission to Teacher Education. Principles and procedures used to develop instructional support for students who need life skills and adaptations to general curriculum. Students are required to design and implement an instructional program. (Fall)
SPED 4272. Teaching Mathematics to Learners with Special Needs. (3) Prerequisite: Admittance to Teacher Education. This course will provide students with effective teaching strategies and materials in math for learners with special needs for teacher licensure in Special Education: General Curriculum (NCDPI). A 12-hour field-based clinical experience is a required component of the course. Assessment and application of instructional techniques are included in the course. (Spring)
SPED 4273. Life Skills. (3) Prerequisite: Admission to Teacher Education. Methods and materials for teaching functional skills in daily living, social, and vocational domains that will enable persons with special needs to live independently in their communities. Ecological assessment for life skills planning. (Fall)
SPED 4274. General Curriculum Access and Adaptations. (3) Prerequisite: Admission to Teacher Education. Strategies for developing curricular priorities for students who need adaptations to the general curriculum including ways to link to state standards in reading, math, writing, science, and other content areas. (Spring)
SPED 4275. Teaching Reading to Learners with Special Needs. (3) Prerequisite: Admittance to Teacher Education. This course will provide students with effective teaching strategies and materials in reading to learners with special needs for teacher licensure in Special Education: General Curriculum (NCDPI). A 12-hour field-based clinical experience is a required component of the course. Assessment and application of instructional techniques are included in the course. (Fall)
SPED 4277. Teaching Written Expression to Learners with Special Needs. (3) Prerequisite: Admittance to Teacher Education. This course will provide students with effective teaching strategies and materials in written expression to learners with special needs. A 12-hour field experience is a required component of the course. The field experience will include assessment and application of instructional techniques with students identified as receiving special education services. The course is designed to address core and specific competencies in teaching written expression to students with special needs for teacher licensure in Special Education: General Curriculum as stipulated by the North Carolina department of Public Instruction (Fall)
SPED 4316. Transition Planning and Service Delivery. (3) Prerequisite: Admission to Teacher Education. Methods and procedures used in preparing students with disabilities for the world of work and independence are studied. (Spring)
SPED 4475. Student Teaching/Seminar: Special Education K-12: General Curriculum.  (15) Prerequisite: Application to Student Teaching. Student teaching is a planned sequence of experiences in the student's area of specialization conducted in an approved school setting under the supervision and coordination of a university supervisor and a cooperating teacher. During student teaching the student must demonstrate the competencies identified for his/her specific teaching field in an appropriate grade level setting. The student spends approximately 35-40 hours per week in an assigned school setting. In addition, the student participates in 8-10 on-campus seminars scheduled throughout the semester. (Fall, Spring)
SPED 4476. Student Teaching/Seminar: Special Education K-12: Adapted Curriculum.  (15) Prerequisite: Application to Student Teaching. Student teaching is a planned sequence of experiences in the student's area of specialization conducted in an approved school setting under the supervision and coordination of a university supervisor and a cooperating teacher. During student teaching the student must demonstrate the competencies identified for his/her specific teaching field in an appropriate grade level setting. The student spends approximately 35-40 hours per week in an assigned school setting. In addition, the student participates in 8-10 on-campus seminars scheduled throughout the semester. (Fall, Spring)
STAT 1220. Elements of Statistics I (BUSN). (3) Prerequisite: MATH 1100 or placement by the department. Non-calculus based introduction to data summarization, discrete and continuous random variables (e.g., binomial, normal), sampling, central limit theorem, estimation, testing hypotheses, and linear regression. Applications of theory will be drawn from areas related to business. May not be taken for credit if credit has been received for STAT 1221 or 1222. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
STAT 1221. Elements of Statistics I. (3) Prerequisite: MATH 1100 or placement by the department. Same topics as STAT 1220 with special emphasis on applications to the life sciences. May not be taken for credit if credit has been received for STAT 1220 or 1222. (Fall, Spring)
STAT 1222. Introduction to Statistics. (3) Prerequisite: MATH 1100 or placement by the department. Same topics as STAT 1220 with special emphasis on applications to the social and behavioral sciences. May not be taken for credit if credit has been received for STAT 1220 or 1221. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
STAT 2122. Introduction to Probability and Statistics. (3) Prerequisite: MATH 1242 or permission of the department. A study of probability models, discrete and continuous random variables, inference about Bernoulli probability, inference about population mean, inference about population variance, the maximum likelihood principle, the minimax principle, Bayes procedures, and linear models. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
STAT 2223. Elements of Statistics II. (3) Prerequisite: Either STAT 1220, STAT 1221, STAT 1222, STAT 2122 or permission of the department. Topics include contingency analysis, design of experiments, more on simple linear regression, and multiple regression. Computers will be used to solve some of the problems. (Fall)
STAT 3110. Applied Regression. (3)  Prerequisite: STAT 2122 or permission of the department. Ordinary regression models, logistic regression models, Poisson regression models. (Spring)
STAT 3122. Probability and Statistics I. (3) Crosslisted as MATH 3122. (Fall) (Evenings)
STAT 3123. Probability and Statistics II. (3) Crosslisted as MATH 3123. (Spring) (Evenings)
STAT 3126. Applied Statistical Methods. (3) Prerequisites: MATH 3123 or permission of the department. Regression analysis, time series analysis, and forecasting. Survival models and their estimation. (On demand)
STAT 3128. Probability and Statistics for Engineers. (3) Prerequisite: MATH 2241. An introduction to: probability theory; discrete and continuous random variables and their probability distributions; joint probability distributions; functions of random variables and their probability distributions; descriptive statistics; point and interval estimation; one and two sample hypothesis testing; quality control; one and two factor ANOVA; and regression. Credit will not be given for both STAT 3128 and any of these courses: STAT 2122, MATH/STAT 3122/3123. STAT 3140. Design of Experiments. (3) Prerequisite: STAT 2122 or permission of the department. Randomization and blocking with paired comparisons, Significance tests and confidence intervals, experiments to compare k treatment means, randomized blocks and two-way factorial designs, designs with more than one blocking variable, empirical modeling, factorial designs at two levels. (Fall) (Alternate years)
STAT 3150. Time Series Analysis. (3) Prerequisites: STAT 2223 or permission of the department. Stationary time series models, ARMA processes, modeling and forecasting with ARMA processes, ARIMA models for nonstationary time series models, spectral densities. (Spring) (Alternate years)
STAT 3160. Applied Multivariate Analysis. (3) Prerequisite: STAT 2223 or permission of the department. Introduction to the fundamental ideas in multivariate analysis using case studies. Descriptive, exploratory, and graphical techniques; introduction to cluster analysis, principal components, factor analysis, discriminant analysis, Hotelling T2 and other methods. (Fall)
STAT 4116. Statistical Computing. (3) Prerequisites: STAT 3123 or permission of the department. Introduction to a variety of computational techniques using various statistics software packages (S-Plus/R or SAS) and symbolic manipulation software packages. Topics include random number generation, density estimation, and re-sampling techniques (bootstrap, jackknife) and Gibbs sample. (Spring)
STAT 4123. Applied Statistics I. (3) Prerequisites: MATH 2164 with a grade of C or better and junior standing, or permission of the department. Review of stochastic variables and probability distributions, methods of estimating a parameter, hypothesis testing, confidence intervals, contingency tables. Linear and multiple regression, time series analysis. (Fall) (Evenings) (Alternate years)
STAT 4124. Applied Statistics II. (3) Prerequisites: STAT 4123 or permission of the department. Single factor analysis of variance. Multi-factor analysis of variance. Randomized complete-block designs, nested or hierarchical designs, Latin squares, factorial experiments. Design of experiments. (Spring)
THEA 1100. Exploration of Voice and Movement. (3)  Creative and effective communication of ideas through the use of the body and voice. Will include physical and vocal technique, improvisation and group problem solving. Four contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
THEA 1160. Creative Drama for the Classroom Teacher. (3) Drama and theatre as tools for exploring the processes of synthesis, creativity, divergent thinking, and experiential and authentic learning. (Fall, Spring on demand)
THEA 1200. Elements of Design for the Stage. (3) Elements and principles of design in relation to the performer, performance and performance space with emphasis on developing perceptual and communication skills through exposure to and analysis of a diverse selection of dance, theatre, and related-performance images. (On demand)
THEA 1210. Acting I. (3)  Introduction to the acting process through voice/body and improvisation and games, technique work focusing on objectives and actions, and text analysis through scene work. Four contact hours. (Fall, Spring)
THEA 1860. Preliminary Experience in Student Teaching. (1) Prerequisite: THEA 1160. Observation of licensed theatre arts teachers at the secondary school level. Some participation in class activities required. Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. (Fall, Spring)
THEA 2140. Play Analysis. (3) Tools for developing the interpretation of the play script, including exploration of the ways scripts are used by directors, actors, designers, and dramaturges in preparing plays for the stage. Theatre major/minor or permission of instructor required. (Spring)
THEA 2207. Puppetry. (3) Types of puppets and the history of puppetry with emphasis on basic puppetry construction and production problems. (On demand)
THEA 2208. Audition Techniques. (2) Prerequisite: THEA 1210 or permission of instructor. The process of auditioning for stage, commercials, and film. Four contact hours. (Spring) (Alternate years)
THEA 2210. Acting II. (3) Prerequisite THEA 1210 or permission of instructor for non-majors. Further development of the skills and techniques used in preparing a role for performance. Advanced scene study and monologue work. Four contact hours. (Fall)
THEA 2215. Stage Makeup. (3) Theories and techniques of applying and designing stage makeup. (Spring)
THEA 2220. Costume Techniques. (2) Corequisite: THEA 2220L. Introduction to costume shop equipment, sewing techniques, and construction of costume accessories. (Fall, Spring)
THEA 2220L. Costume Techniques Laboratory. (1) Corequisite: THEA 2220. Exploration of costume shop materials and construction procedures. Three laboratory hours per week. (Fall, Spring)
THEA 2230. Scenic Design I. (3) An introduction to scenic design theory and techniques for theatre, dance, and opera. (Fall)
THEA 2240. Stagecraft. (2) Corequisite: THEA 2240L. An introduction to theatrical scenery materials and construction procedures. Exploration of various roles in a scenic studio. (Fall)
THEA 2240L. Stagecraft Laboratory. (1) Corequisite: THEA 2240. Exploration of scenic materials and construction procedures. Three laboratory hours per week. (Fall)
THEA 2250. Lighting Design I. (3) An introduction to lighting design theory and techniques for theatre, dance, and opera. (Spring, Alternate Falls)
THEA 2260. Lighting Technology. (2) Corequisite: THEA 2260L. Fundamentals of stage lighting including instrument handling, focusing, basic electrical theory and practitioner roles. (Fall)
THEA 2260L. Lighting Technology. (1) Corequisite: THEA 2260. Exploration of stage lighting fixtures and techniques. Three laboratory hours per week. (Fall)
THEA 2270. Costume Design I. (3) An introduction to costume design theory and techniques for theatre, dance, and opera. (Fall)
THEA 2401. Production Practicum. (1) Practical application of production work in the areas of scenery, lighting, sound, costuming, properties, publicity, box office, house management, and stage management. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
THEA 2402. Performance Practicum: Theatre. (1) Prerequisite: Audition. Practical application of performance techniques within a production setting, including auditions, rehearsals, and performances. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring)
THEA 2460. Practicum in Creative Drama: K-8. (3) Prerequisite: THEA 1160 or permission of instructor. Study and application of advanced theories, concepts, competencies, and processes unique to primary and middle school settings, with particular attention to the various subject areas. Centered on in-school teaching experience and clinical practice. (Spring)
THEA 2640. Playwriting/Screenwriting. (3)  Writing plays for stage or screen and performing dramatic readings of fellow writers’ scenes. (Fall, Spring)
THEA 2670. Stage Management. (3) An introduction to Stage Management through theory and practice as it relates to live performance and the arts. (Fall, Spring)
THEA 3130. Ancient, Medieval, and Asian Theatre. (3) Prerequisite: Junior standing or higher. The history and drama of ancient Greek, ancient Roman, medieval European, and traditional Asian forms of theatre. (Alternate years)
THEA 3131. Renaissance European Theatre. (3) Prerequisite: Junior standing or higher. The history and drama of Renaissance European theatre, including Shakespeare. (Alternate years)
THEA 3132. 17th to Early 20th Century Theatre. (3) Prerequisite: Junior standing or higher. The history and drama of European and American theatre, from the Restoration period to early twentieth-century realism and various antirealist movements. (Alternate years)
THEA 3133. Contemporary Theatre. (3) Prerequisite: Junior standing or higher. The history and drama of twentieth and twenty-first century theatre in America, Europe, Africa, and elsewhere. (Alternate years)
THEA 3134. Costume History. (3) Introduction to historical origins and evolution of clothing including social and economic factors that influenced development. (Alternate Springs)
THEA 3135. History of Ornament. (3) Form and function of furniture, architecture, and decoration through the ages. (Alternate Springs)
THEA 3210. Acting III. (3) Prerequisite: THEA 2210. In-depth study of sub-text, focusing on 19th Century Modern Realism. May be repeated for credit with change of approach. Four contact hours. (Spring, On demand)
THEA 3220. Advanced Costume Techniques. (3) Prerequisite: THEA 2220 or permission of instructor. In-depth exploration of pattern development, draping, fabric modification, and construction of accessories. (Alternate Springs)
THEA 3221. Directing I. (3) Prerequisite THEA 1210 or permission of instructor. Principles and techniques of play directing including analyzing texts, staging, and communication with actors. (Fall)
THEA 3241. Technical Design. (3) Prerequisite: THEA 2240 or permission of instructor. Exploration of topics related to Technical Design for performance including drafting, management, and structures. (On demand)
THEA 3260. Advanced Lighting Technology. (3) Prerequisite: THEA 2260 or permission of instructor. In-depth exploration of dimming, control, paperwork, modern instrumentation. (On demand)
THEA 3265. Introduction to Computer Aided Drafting 2D. (3) An introduction to precision drafting and rendering using the computer. (Spring)
THEA 4001. Topics in Theatre. (1-6)  Special topic in theatre. May be repeated for credit with change of topic. (On demand)
THEA 4140. Performance Theory. (3)  Prerequisite: Junior standing or higher and Theatre major/minor or permission of instructor required. Application of different perspectives to drama on the page, stage, and screen using various performance theories and approaches: semiotics, deconstruction, psychoanalysis, feminism, post-colonialism, and performance studies. (Fall)
THEA 4160. Theatre for Youth. (3) An examination of the important works in the genre of Theatre for Youth with an emphasis on playwrights and analysis of content as it relates to social issues. (Fall)
THEA 4165. Methods of Facilitating Learning in Theatre Arts. (3)  Prerequisites: THEA 1860, THEA 2460, and EDUC 2100; Junior standing or permission of instructor. Exploration of pedagogical methodologies in theatre arts and the application of theory to the classroom setting. Includes instructional planning and competencies for theatre arts classes. Includes clinical experience. (Alternate Fall)
THEA 4210. Acting IV. (3) Prerequisite: THEA 2210. Exploration of characters focusing on various historical periods, theatrical styles, and cultural influences. May be repeated once for credit. Four contact hours. (On demand)
THEA 4221. Directing II. (3) Prerequisite: THEA 3221. Continuation of THEA 3221, with emphasis on advanced analysis, coaching, communication with designers, and complex staging problems. (Spring)
THEA 4230. Scenic Design II. (3) Prerequisite: THEA 2230 or permission of instructor. Advanced scenic design theory and projects. (Alternate Spring)
THEA 4233. Scenic Painting. (3) An introduction to basic scenic painting techniques, paint media, and materials. (Alternate Fall)
THEA 4250. Lighting Design II. (3) Prerequisite: THEA 2250 or permission of instructor. Advanced lighting design theory and projects. (Alternate Fall)
THEA 4270. Costume Design II. (3) Prerequisite: THEA 2210 or permission of instructor. Advanced costume design theory and projects. (Alternate Spring)
THEA 4400. Internship in Theatre. (3-6) Cross-listed as THEA 5400 (see Graduate Catalog). Prerequisite: GPA of a least 2.5, junior status, and permission of department chair. Research and/or in-service training for theatre majors and minors in cooperating organizations. Specific content is based upon a contract between the students, department, and professional organization. Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
THEA 4460. Practicum in Secondary School Play Production: 9-12. (3) Cross-listed as THEA 5410 (see Graduate Catalog). Prerequisites: THEA 1210 and THEA 3221 or permission of instructor. Study and application of advanced theories, concepts, competencies, and processes in theatre arts for teaching the specialized areas of production and performance in a secondary school setting (9-12). (Alternate Spring)
THEA 4467. Student Teaching/Seminar: K-12 Fine and Performing Arts: Theatre. (15)  Prerequisite: approved application for student teaching; senior status; completion of professional education requirements; grades of C or better in all courses required for licensure. Corequisite: enrollment only in student teaching. A planned sequence of experiences in the student’s area of specialization conducted in an approved school setting under the supervision and coordination of a University supervisor and a cooperating teacher in which the student demonstrates the competencies identified for his/her specific teaching field in an appropriate grade level setting. (Fall, Spring)
THEA 4600. Senior Seminar in Theatre. (1) Prerequisites: THEA 1600 and senior standing. Synthesis, integration, and application of theoretical and experiential study in dance and theatre through individual/group designed seminar topic. Investigation and planning for immediate and life-long career options through guest lectures, panel discussions, site visits, presentations, and related mini-projects. Two contact hours. Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. (Fall)
THEA 4601. Individual Project. (1-6) Prerequisite: Permission of department chair. May be repeated for credit. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
THEA 4610. Advanced Design, Technology, & Management. (2-3) Prerequisite: Permission of instructor. Large-scale applications of design and production topics on realized productions. May be repeated for credit. (On demand)
THEA 4800. Directed Independent Study. (1-3) Prerequisite: Permission of the instructor and the department, major in Theatre or Theatre Education with Junior or Senior standing, and a GPA of at least 2.5. This course is designed to allow students to pursue faculty-directed independent study topics (1) of special interest to the student, (2) within the area of the instructor’s special competence, (3) not provided by other Department offerings. May be repeated for credit. (On demand)
TRAN 3401. Introduction to Translation Studies. (3) Prerequisites: Native or near native fluency in English and completion of French, German, or Spanish 2202, or the equivalent, with a grade of C or better. History, theory, pragmatics, and procedures of the field of translation. Introduction to text typology, terminology, and issues such as register, audience, editing, and computer-assisted translating. Conducted in English. (Fall)
TRAN 4402-F. Practicum in Translating I – French. (3) Prerequisites: Completion of or concurrent enrollment in TRAN 3401 and a French 3000-level course or equivalent, with a grade of C or better, or permission of the department. Comparative stylistics, restructuring texts, editing, troubleshooting, and techniques of the translator in working with a variety of text types. Conducted in English and French. (Spring, Alternate years)
TRAN 4402-G. Practicum in Translating I – German. (3) Prerequisites: Completion of or concurrent enrollment in TRAN 3401 and a German 3000-level course or equivalent, with a grade of C or better, or permission of the department. Comparative stylistics, restructuring texts, editing, troubleshooting, and techniques of the translator in working with a variety of text types. Conducted in English and German. (Spring, Alternate years)
TRAN 4402-R. Practicum in Translating I – Russian. (3) Prerequisites: Completion of or concurrent enrollment in TRAN 3401 and a Russian 3000-level course or equivalent with a grade of B or better, or permission of the department. Grammatical and lexical issues of translation; restructuring texts, editing, troubleshooting, and techniques of the translator in working with a variety of text types (documents, essays, fiction, poetry). Conducted in English and Russian. (Spring, Alternate years)
TRAN 4402-S. Practicum in Translating I – Spanish. (3) Prerequisites: Completion of or concurrent enrollment in TRAN 3401 and a Spanish 3000-level course or equivalent, with a grade of C or better, or permission of the department. Comparative stylistics, restructuring texts, editing, troubleshooting, and techniques of the translator in working with a variety of text types (e.g., business legal, medical, technical, etc.). Continues with history and theory of translation. Conducted in English and Spanish. (Fall)
TRAN 4403-F. Practicum in Translating II – French. (3) Prerequisites: Completion of TRAN 4402-F, with a grade of C or better, or permission of the department. Critical analysis of different kinds of texts; translating for specific audiences; problems of terminology; development of working dictionaries in fields(s) of specialization. Conducted in English and French. (Fall, Alternate years)
TRAN 4403-G. Practicum in Translating II – German. (3) Prerequisites: Completion of TRAN 4402-G, with a grade of C or better, or permission of the department. Critical analysis of different kinds of texts; translating for specific audiences; problems of terminology; development of working dictionaries in fields(s) of specialization. Conducted in English and German. (Fall, Alternate years)
TRAN 4403-R. Practicum in Translating II – Russian. (3) Prerequisites: Completion of TRAN 4402-R with a grade of B or better, or permission of the department. Further work in restructuring texts, editing, troubleshooting. Pragmatic/cultural issues of translation in dealing with a variety of text types (documents, essays, fiction, poetry) as well as the specifics of film translating. Conducted in English and Russian. (Fall, Alternate years)
TRAN 4403-S. Practicum in Translating II – Spanish. (3) Prerequisites: Completion of TRAN 3401 or TRAN 4402-S, and a Spanish 3000-level course or equivalent, each with a grade of C or better, or permission of the department. Further work in restructuring texts, editing, troubleshooting, and translation of a variety of literary and cultural text types (e.g., fiction, poetry, drama, essay, film). Continues with history and theory of translation. Conducted in English and Spanish. May be taken concurrently with TRAN 4404-S and may also count as course work for the Spanish major. (Spring)
TRAN 4404-F. Practicum in Translating III – French. (3)  Prerequisites: Completion of or concurrent enrollment in TRAN 4403-F, with a grade of C or better, or permission of the department. Study of professional journals, technologies, protocol, and resources in the field (e.g., ATA, ALTA). Advanced issues of translation. Translation of a semester-long project in individual consultation. Conducted in English and French. (Spring, Alternate years)
TRAN 4404-G. Practicum in Translating III – German. (3)  Prerequisites: Completion of or concurrent enrollment in TRAN 4403-G, with a grade of C or better, or permission of the department. Study of professional journals, technologies, protocol, and resources in the field (e.g., ATA, ALTA). Advanced issues of translation. Translation of a semester-long project in individual consultation. Conducted in English and German. (Spring, Alternate years)
TRAN 4404-R. Practicum in Translating III – Russian. (3)  Prerequisites: Completion of TRAN 4403-R, with a grade of B or better, or permission of the department. Study of professional journals, technologies, protocol, and resources in the field (e.g., ATA, ALTA). Advanced issues of translation. Translation of a semester-long project in individual consultation with instructor. Conducted in English and Russian. (Spring, Alternate years)
TRAN 4404-S. Practicum in Translating III – Spanish. (3)  Prerequisites: Completion of TRAN 3401 or TRAN 4402-S, and a Spanish 3000-level course or equivalent, each with a grade of C or better, or permission of the department. Vocational, preprofessionalizing activities. Study of professional journals, technologies, protocol, and resources in the field (e.g., ATA, ALTA). Advanced issues of translation. Translation of a semester-long project in individual consultation. Conducted in English and Spanish. May be taken concurrently with TRAN 4403-S. (Spring)
UCOL 1000. College Transition for First Year Students. (1-3) Designed to assist with the intellectual and social transition from high school to college by increasing the involvement of students in the intellectual life of the campus; providing an orientation to resources available to students; and promoting problem solving and writing skills. Students who have previously taken any UCOL 1000-level class may not receive credit for this course. (Fall, Spring)
UCOL 1010. College Transition for Transfers. (3)  Designed to assist with the intellectual and social transition to UNC Charlotte for transfer students by increasing the involvement of students in the intellectual life of the campus; providing an orientation to resources available to students; and promoting problem solving and writing skills. Students who have previously taken any UCOL 1000-level class may not receive credit for this course. (Fall, Spring)
UCOL 1011. College Transition for Transfers. (3)  Designed to assist with the intellectual and social transition to UNC Charlotte for transfer students by and increasing the involvement of students in the intellectual life of the campus; providing an orientation to resources available to students; and promoting problem solving and writing skills. Students who have previously taken any UCOL 1000-level class may not receive credit for this course. (Fall, Spring)
UCOL 1200. First Year Seminar. (3) A seminar-style learning experience focused around a particular theme that is designed to assist with the intellectual and social transition from high school to college by increasing the involvement of students in the intellectual life of the campus; providing an orientation to resources available to students; and promoting problem solving and writing skills. Students who have previously taken any UCOL 1000-level class may not receive credit for this course. (Fall, Spring)
UCOL 1205. Enrichment Seminar. (3) A seminarstyle learning experience designed to enrich the education experience of one or more courses taken concurrently. The enrichment seminar is focused around a particular theme defined by the companion course(s) and provides opportunities to explore the topics of the course(s) in more detail and with additional materials, experiences, and assignments. The enrichment seminar will also address the college transition experience by enhancing students’ involvement with and knowledge of the campus and its resources and promoting problem solving and oral and written communication skills. Open to new firstyear students only; requires co-registration in designated companion section(s) as indicated. May be repeated once for credit as topics vary. (Fall, Spring)
UCOL 1210. Transfer Seminar. (3)  A seminarstyle learning experience focused around a particular theme that is designed to assist with the intellectual and social transition to UNC Charlotte for transfer students by increasing the involvement of students in the intellectual life of the campus; providing an orientation to resources available to students; and promoting problem solving and writing skills. Students who have previously taken any UCOL 1000-level class may not receive credit for this course. (Fall, Spring)
UCOL 1211. Transfer Seminar. (3)  A seminarstyle learning experience focused around a particular theme that is designed to assist with the intellectual and social transition to UNC Charlotte for transfer students by increasing the involvement of students in the intellectual life of the campus; providing an orientation to resources available to students; and promoting problem solving and oral communication skills. Students who have previously taken any UCOL 1000-level class may not receive credit for this course. (Fall, Spring)
UCOL 2000. Topics in General Education. (3) Prerequisites: sophomore standing and permission of the sponsoring department. Topics chosen from the fields covered by General Education in order to demonstrate relationships and interdisciplinary influences. May be repeated for credit as topics vary with permission of the student's major department. Can be used toward general degree requirements as indicated each time the course is offered. (On demand)
UCOL 2200. University Learning Seminar. (1-3) Prerequisite: permission of University College. Provides instruction in digital literacy, critical thinking, problem solving, and written and oral communication skills. Each section will be developed around a content theme selected from instructor’s discipline. Designed to reinforce and augment students’ intellectual and social transition to the University learning environment. Students who have previously taken a UCOL 1000-level course may receive credit for this course if registering with permission. (Fall, Spring)
UCOL 3050. Teaching Internship. (1-3) Prerequisite: junior standing and permission of the sponsoring unit and supervising instructor. Students enrolled in the internship will have a structured opportunity to develop teaching-related skills by providing assistance to faculty in the classroom and/or working in a structured mentoring role in support units such as the University Center for Academic Excellence. Duties will vary depending upon the assignment but may include: conducting review sessions, facilitating study skills sessions, lecturing, assisting faculty member with exams. May be repeated for credit up to six hours. Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. (Honors) (Fall, Spring)
UCOL 3800. Independent Study. (3) Prerequisite: Permission of instructor and Dean of University College. Individual research, research, or filed-based experience in a topic under the supervision of a faculty member. May be repeated for credit with permission. (On demand)
URBS 2200. Introduction to Urban Studies. (3) Cross-listed with GEOG 2200. A survey course exploring the diverse perspectives and experience of North American Cities. Lectures and discussions will focus on the development, organization, function, and meaning of urban areas, as well as the multiple and complex relationships that exist between cities and the people who live and work within them. (Fall, Spring)
URBS 3050. Topics in Urban Studies. (3) Timely and important areas of scholarship and application relevant to urban studies. May be repeated for credit as topics vary with prior permission from Director of the Urban Studies Minor. (On demand)
URBS 3801. Independent Study. (1-3) Prerequisites: URBS 2200, declared Urban Studies Minor with Junior or Senior standing, a GPA of at least 2.0, permission of supervising instructor and Director of Urban Studies Minor. Area of study beyond the scope of current offerings to be devised by student and faculty member. May be repeated. Three hours of URBS 3801 may be used toward the URBS minor with prior approval of the Director of Urban Studies Minor. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
URBS 4401. Internship in Urban Studies. (3) Prerequisites: URBS 2200, declared Urban Studies minor with Junior or Senior standing, a GPA of at least 2.0 and permission of Director of Urban Studies Minor. Students work 8-10 hours per week (total 120 hours per semester) for 3 credit hours in an approved research or in-service placement relevant to urban studies. Specific content of internship based on a contract between the student, supervising professor, and community/corporate organization. May not be repeated for credit. Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
WGST 2051. Topics in Women’s Studies. (3)  Special topics in Women’s Studies. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (On demand)
WGST 2110. Women and the Media. (3) Crosslisted as COMM 2110. Examination of messages about women as conveyed in contemporary media (magazines, newspapers, videos, the Internet, video games, television, and movies.) The role of gender in the power structures of the media producers is also analyzed. (Fall)
WGST 2120. African American Women. (3) Crosslisted as AFRS 4120. This course explores how cultural, political, historical and economic factors shape African American women’s positions and opportunities in society today. (On demand)
WGST 2123. Women in Cross-Cultural Perspective. (3) Cross-listed as ANTH 2123. A cross-cultural survey of the lives of women and the dynamics of gender throughout the world. Uses anthropological research to examine how gender influences evolution, social stratification, work, kinship, and perceptions of the body. (Alternate years)
WGST 2130. Masculinity and Manhood. (3) This class examines the construction of masculinity in sports, family, work and other social relationships, showing how it shapes and is shaped by people, institutions and society. (On demand)
WGST 2150. US Women’s History to 1877. (3) Cross-listed as HIST 2150. A survey of women’s experience in the U. S. from colonization through the civil war and reconstruction. Special emphasis on the evolution of women’s public roles and the impact of class, race, and region in shaping women’s lives. (Alternate years)
WGST 2251. US Women’s History since 1877. (3) Cross-listed as HIST 2151. A survey of women’s experience in the U.S. from reconstruction to the present. Special emphasis on work, family, and feminism, and the impact of class, race, and region in shaping women’s lives. (Alternate years)
WGST 2252. European Women’s History. (3) Crosslisted as HIST 2152. An exploration of women’s experiences in western Europe and Russia, covering topics of religion, work, family, and politics. (Alternate years)
WGST 3019. Hispanic Women Writers in English. (3)  Cross-listed as LTAM 3319 and SPAN 3019. Prerequisite: ENGL 1102 and sophomore standing, or permission of instructor. Examination of prose and poetry by women writers from Spain and the Americas to understand women’s voices and other cultures. Conducted in English. Knowledge of Spanish not required. Not applicable toward Spanish major or minor. (On demand)
WGST 3051. Topics in Women’s Studies. (3)  Special topics in Women’s Studies. May be repeated for credit as topics vary. (On demand)
