ITCS 1101. Introduction to Computer Concepts. (3)  Pre- or corequisite: MATH 1100, MATH 1101, MATH 1103, MATH 1120, or MATH 1241.  Introductory course that gives an overview of computer hardware and software. Primary emphasis is on productivity software (word processing, spreadsheet, and graphical presentation).  These applications are taught through a series of projects/assignments.  Aspects of Internet research are also covered. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Online)
ITCS 1102. Advanced Internet Concepts. (3)  Cross-listed as ITIS 1102.  Prerequisite:  ITCS 1101 or permission of department. This course is an advanced study of the Internet environment. This course is designed for any student who is familiar with office productivity tools and a user of Internet technologies; it addresses advanced concepts of computer literacy. Topics include: concepts of website design and how to evaluate websites; proper use of synchronous and asynchronous communication tools (e.g., chat, email, IM); issues of copyright and cyber-ethics; using the Internet to do research; and publishing via the Internet. Other topics may be added to keep the content current and relevant. Students will complete extensive Internet oriented projects to demonstrate mastery of the skills discussed in class. (May not be taken for credit by ITIS majors.) (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Online)
ITCS 1200. Freshman Seminar. (3)  Cross-listed as ITIS 1200.  Prerequisite:  permission of department.  An introductory Information Technology course designed to assist students with the transition to college by acquainting them with the University’s resources and support, exploring opportunities in the IT field, and developing a strong sense of community within the College of Computing & Informatics and the University as a whole.  The development of learning skills, time management skills, and other life skills necessary for college success will be emphasized.  (On demand)
ITCS 1203. Survey of Computing. (3)  Cross-listed as ITIS 1203.  Introductory course that explores the broad field of computing as it applies to daily life. Topics cover computers of all sizes from handheld devices to super computers; the role of software from operating systems to applications; the software development process; issues of security and privacy on the Internet and the World Wide Web; and possible fields of study within the broad field of information technology. (On demand)
ITCS 1212. Introduction to Computer Science I. (4)  Corequisite: ITCS 1212L.  Pre- or corequisite: MATH 1100, MATH 1103, MATH 1120, or MATH 1241. Introduction to algorithmic problem solving strategies and algorithm development; basic concepts and terminology of computers; study of data representation and number systems; use of computers to implement numerical and symbolic algorithms. General programming concepts will be taught through the use of a high level language. The course grade includes the student’s performance in ITCS 1212L. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ITCS 1212L. Programming Lab I. (0)  Corequisite: ITCS 1212.  Guided laboratory exercises dealing with programming mechanics; algorithm development; and the use of computers in problem solving. One laboratory period of three hours per week. Performance in ITCS 1212L will be counted as portion of the ITCS 1212 grade. Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
ITCS 1213. Introduction to Computer Science II. (4)  Prerequisite: ITCS 1212 with grade of C or above, or permission of department. An advanced study of programming based on object-oriented concepts. This course extends the fundamentals studies in ITCS 1212. Concepts are taught by means of an in-depth study of an object-oriented language. The course grade includes the student’s performances in ITCS 1213L. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
ITCS 1213L. Programming Lab II. (0)  Corequisite: ITCS 1213. Guided laboratory exercises dealing with programming mechanics; object-oriented design methodology; and the use of computers in problem solving. The lab consists of one laboratory period of three hours per week. Performance in ITCS 1213L will be counted as a portion of the ITCS 1213 grade. Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
ITCS 1301. Introduction to the Financial Services Industry. (3)  Cross-listed as ITIS 1301.  An overview of the financial services industry, including such areas as the industry components; regulatory considerations and their impact; and relations with other institutions. (Fall, Summer) (Evenings)
ITCS 1600. Computing Professionals. (1)  Cross-listed as ITIS 1600.  This required course should be taken by all Freshman and Transfer students during their first semester in the College of Computing and Informatics.  It is designed to assist with the intellectual and social transition from high school or community college to university by increasing the involvement of students in the intellectual life on campus and within the professional computing community; providing an orientation to resources available to students; promoting oral and writing skills; and enabling students to develop a personal education plan.  The course has three components: a seminar series, peer group engagement, and extra-curricular engagement.  Course grades are based on participation in all three components, quality of written reflections on all three components, and peer and instructor review of individual performance in peer group engagement activities, including the development of a personal education plan.  May not be repeated for grade replacement.  (Fall, Spring)
ITCS 1610. Computing Applications Seminar. (3) (SL)  Prerequisite: MATH 1100, 1103, 1120, or 1242. A service-learning seminar course designed to emphasize the social relevance of computing.  The course aims to inform non-computing specialists of computing technologies, research, and career opportunities.  Seminar topics are intended to enhance disciplinary knowledge and to develop leadership skills related to using computing knowledge and skills in service to society.  Emphasis placed on the basic concepts of leadership theory and its application within the computing discipline on an individual, group, and societal level.  Students participate in team-based computing service-learning projects in the community, in conjunction with computing majors taking ITCS 3610.  Student performance evaluation considers individual homework assignments, participation in team projects, and class participation. (Spring)
ITCS 1712. Introduction to Computer Science (Honors). (3)  Pre- or corequisites: MATH 1120 or MATH 1241; restricted to CCI Honors students, or an acceptable score on the ITCS 1712 placement test. Introduction to algorithmic problem solving using high level programming languages. Basic programming concepts (decision making, iteration, subroutines) and data types (atomic and aggregates) will be taught in C++ and Java. Advanced concepts such as pointers, references, and polymorphism will be explored. (Fall) (Evenings)
ITCS 2050. Topics in Computer Science. (1-3) Prerequisite: Permission of department. Topics in computer science selected to supplement the regular course offerings at the 2000 level.  May be repeated for credit with permission of department.  (Additionally, a student may register for multiple sections of the course with different topics in the same semester or in different semesters.) (On demand)
ITCS 2116. C Programming. (3) Prerequisite: Knowledge of any other computer programming language or permission of department.  A study of the programming language C.  Data types, operators, functions, program structure, file I/O, storage classes, exceptions, concurrent programming, and the preprocessor. (Summer) (Evenings)
ITCS 2163. Introduction to File Processing. (3) Prerequisite: ITCS 1213 and ITCS 1213L. Concepts and techniques of structuring data on external storage devices; provides the foundation for applications of data structures and file processing techniques. (On demand)
ITCS 2175. Logic and Algorithms. (3)  Prerequisites: ITCS 1212; and MATH 1120 or MATH 1241.  Introduction to propositional calculus, predicate calculus, algorithms, logic functions, finite-state machines; logic design. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings) (Online)
ITCS 2181. Computer Logic and Design. (3) Prerequisite: ITCS 1212 or permission of department. Logic design; logic circuits; state diagrams; Karnaugh maps; memories; tri-state devices; bus structures; and data control concepts. (On demand)
ITCS 2214. Data Structures. (3) Prerequisites: ITCS 1213 and ITCS 1213L with grades of C or above, or permission of department.  A study of the theory and implementation of abstract data types (ADTs) including stacks, queues, and both general purpose and specialized trees and graphs.  Programming emphasis is on the use of an object-oriented language to implement algorithms related to the various data structures studied including creation, searching, and traversal of ADTs. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings) (Online)
ITCS 2215. Design and Analysis of Algorithms. (3) Prerequisites:  MATH 1120 or MATH 1241; ITCS 2175 or MATH 1165; and ITCS 2214.  Introduction to the design and analysis of algorithms. Design techniques: divide-and-conquer, greedy approach, dynamic programming.  Algorithm analysis: asymptotic notation, recurrence relation, time space complexity and tradeoffs. Study of sorting, searching, hashing, and graph algorithms. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings) (Online)
ITCS 2231. Introduction to Business Programming.  (3)  Cross-listed as INFO 2231.  Pre- or corequisite: INFO 2130 or permission of department.  The examination of business problems, the extraction of the logic and business rules, and the relationship between business logic, programming constructs and technologies for decision support.  (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Online)
ITCS 2301. Financial Services Computing Environment. (3) Cross-listed as ITIS 2301. Prerequisite: ITCS 1301 or ITIS 1301.  The objective is for the student to gain insights on several key components in financial computing environments and the enabling technologies. (Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
ITCS 3050. Topics in Computer Science. (1-3) Prerequisite: Permission of department.  Topics in computer science selected to supplement the regular course offerings at the 3000 level. May be repeated for credit with permission of department.  (Additionally, a student may register for multiple sections of the course with different topics in the same semester or in different semesters.) (On demand)
ITCS 3110. Compiler Construction. (3)  Prerequisite: ITCS 2215. Review of programming language structures, translation, loading, execution, and storage allocation. Compilation of simple expressions and statements. Organization of a compiler, including compile-time and run-time tables, lexical scan, syntax scan, object code generation, error diagnostics, object code optimization techniques, and overall design. Use of compiler writing languages and boot strapping. (On demand)
ITCS 3112. Design and Implementation of Object-Oriented Systems. (3)  Prerequisite: ITCS 2215.  In-depth exploration of object-oriented programming and system development.  Topics include: evolution of object-oriented methodology; concept of the object-oriented approach; object-oriented programming languages; object-oriented analysis and design; the design of software for reuse; and incremental software development. (Spring) (Evenings)
ITCS 3123. Introduction to Numerical Methods. (3) Prerequisites: ITCS 2214; and MATH 1241 or MATH 1120. General concepts of scientific computing and their applications to such areas as non-linear equations, numerical integration, spline and polynomial interpolation, and initial value problems. (On demand)
ITCS 3134. Digital Image Processing. (3)  Prerequisites: ITCS 2214, MATH 1242, and MATH 2164 with grades of C or above.  Overview of fundamentals of image acquisition, representation, enhancement, segmentation, reconstruction, analysis and recognition.  Image generation, viewing and perception; image transformations using the Fourier transform; spatial operations and filtering (spatial and frequency domain); image coding; lossless and lossy compression; boundary and region based segmentation; thresholding and classification; boundary and regional image descriptors; matching and neural networks; shape numbers.  (Spring) (Evenings)
ITCS 3143. Operating Systems. (3)  Prerequisite: ITCS 2214 or permission of department.  Introduction to multiprogramming operating systems.  Process synchronization and management of memory, devices, and files; performance evaluation. (On demand)
ITCS 3146. Operating Systems and Networking. (3) Prerequisite: ITCS 2215 or permission of department.  Introduces the fundamentals of operating systems together with the basics of networking and communications.  Topics include: processes, thread, cache, memory management, virtual memory, concurrency, assembly language, network architecture and protocols, web and HTTP, UPD and TCP, internet routing. (Fall, Spring) (Evenings)
ITCS 3152. Symbolic Programming. (3)  Prerequisite: ITCS 2214.  Basic concepts of symbolic programming including selected topics in artificial intelligence, heuristic searching, symbolic algebra, language parsing, and theorem proving. (Fall) (Evenings)
ITCS 3153. Introduction to Artificial Intelligence. (3) Prerequisite: ITCS 3152 or permission of department. Basic concepts of artificial intelligence. Topics include: defining the problem as a state space search, production systems; heuristic search; basic problem-solving methods; game playing; knowledge representation using predicate logic, semantic nets, frames, and scripts; non-monotonic reasoning, statistical and probabilistic reasoning. (Spring) (Evenings)
ITCS 3155. Software Engineering. (3)  Prerequisites: ITCS 1213 and ITCS 1213L, or permission of department. The system development cycle is examined in detail from the aspects of software engineering.  Current tools and techniques of systems design-data dictionary, data flow diagrams, structured walkthroughs, and capacity planning will be taught and presented in conjunction with case studies and class problems. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
ITCS 3160. Database Design and Implementation. (3)  Prerequisites: ITCS 1213 and ITCS 1213L, or permission of department.  Logical and physical database organization, data models, design issues, and secondary storage considerations.  Emphasis on actual participation in the design and implementation of databases. (Fall, Spring) (Evenings)
ITCS 3166. Introduction to Computer Networks. (3)  Prerequisite: ITCS 1213 and ITCS 1213L, or permission of department.  Internet architecture and protocols.  Distributed vs. centralized processing. Data communications; speed; capacity; media, protocols.  Network architectures.  Evaluation of alternatives.  Case studies. (Fall, Spring)
ITCS 3170. Applied Scientific Computing. (3)  Prerequisites:  MATH 2164 or its equivalent.  Topics include:  Concepts of continuous and discrete signals; continuous Fourier transform and its applications in multimedia processing; discrete Fourier transform and its applications in arts and multimedia processing; fundamentals of stochastic systems; fundamentals of ordinary differential equations; applications of  differential equations in modeling; wavelet transform and its applications in music and multimedia processing; fundamentals of fractals and their application in arts and science; classification and clustering.  (On demand)
ITCS 3181. Logic and Computer Systems. (3) Prerequisites: ITCS 2175 and ITCS 2215.  Corequisite: ITCS 3181L.  Fundamental layers of digital computer systems: Switch level network structure; digital logic level including ALU, registers, buses; microprogramming level; conventional Instruction Set Architecture level and assembly language; memory organization and architecture; pipelining and functional parallelism. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
ITCS 3181L. Computer Systems Lab and Recitation. (1)  Corequisite: ITCS 3181.  Guided laboratory exercises and recitation for design of multilevel computer systems: combinational and sequential logic networks; Arithmetic and Logic Unit; pipeline design; microprogramming and assembly language practice; computer simulation practice.  Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis.  (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
ITCS 3182. Computer Organization and Architecture. (3)  Prerequisite: ITCS 2181 or ECGR 2181.  Machine level representation of data; von Neumann architecture; instruction sets and types; addressing types; assembly and machine language programming; control unit and microprogramming; alternate architectures. (On demand)
ITCS 3183. Hardware System Design. (3)  Prerequisite: ITCS 3181 or ITCS 3182, or permission of department.  Design of hardwired control systems; processors and memory systems; application specific design; use of simulation tools.  Laboratory intensive course. (On demand)
ITCS 3211. Computing Leaders Team Projects. (1) (SL)  Prerequisite: ITCS 3610 or ITCS 1610.  A service-learning course that builds upon the leadership concepts from ITCS 3610 through focused hands-on experience with service-learning projects. Students work in teams to apply computing technologies, knowledge and skills to serve community needs.  May be repeated for elective credit. (Fall, Spring)
ITCS 3212. Computing Leaders Team Leaders. (1) (SL)  Prerequisite: ITCS 3610 or ITCS 1610.  A service-learning course that builds upon the leadership concepts from ITCS 3610 through focused hands-on experience with service-learning projects.  Companion course to ITCS 3211; students in this course serve as team leaders for the team projects undertaken by students in ITCS 3211.  Students lead teams to apply computing technologies, knowledge, and skills to serve community needs. May be repeated for elective credit. (Fall, Spring)
ITCS 3216. Introduction to Cognitive Science. (3)  Cross-listed as PSYC 3216.  Prerequisite: Permission of department.  Interdisciplinary introduction to the science of the mind.  Broad coverage of such topics as philosophy of mind, human memory processes, reasoning and problem solving, artificial intelligence, language processing (human and machine), neural structures and processes, and vision. (Spring, Odd years)
ITCS 3301. Introduction to the Regulatory Environment for Financial Services Firms. (3)  Cross-listed as ITIS 3301. Prerequisite: ITCS 2301 or ITIS 2301.  Using case studies, enable the student to understand the compliance and regulatory environment that currently exists for Financial Services firms. (Fall, Summer) (Evenings)
ITCS 3590. Computer Science Cooperative Education and 49ership Experience. (0)  This course is required of Co-op and 49ership/service 49ership students during the semester they are working.  Acceptance into the Experiential Learning Program is required.  Participating students pay a course registration fee for transcript notation.  Assignments must be arranged and approved in advance.  Course may be repeated.  Graded on a Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory basis.  Only open to undergraduate students; graduate level students are encouraged to contact their academic departments to inquire about academic or industrial internship options for credit.  For more information, contact the University Career Center.  (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ITCS 3610. Computing Leaders Seminar. (3) (SL)  Prerequisite: must be a CCI major.  A service-learning seminar course.  Seminar topics are intended to enhance disciplinary knowledge and skills (computing technologies, research, careers) and to develop leadership skills by using computing knowledge and skills in service to society (service and civic engagement).  Emphasis placed on the basic concepts of leadership theory and its application within the computing discipline on an individual, group, and societal level.  Students participate in team-based computing service-learning projects in the community. Student performance evaluation considers individual homework assignments, participation in team projects, class participation, and feedback from those served. (Spring)
ITCS 3688. Computers and Their Impact on Society. (3) (O, W)  Prerequisite: Junior standing and permission of department.  A study of current topics (software piracy, hacking, professional conduct) in computer science and the impact of computers on various subsets (home, government, and education) of society. (Fall, Spring) (Evenings)
ITCS 3690. Seminar. (1-6)  Prerequisite: Permission of department.  May be repeated for credit. (On demand)
ITCS 3691. Seminar. (1-6)  Prerequisite: Permission of department.  A continuation of ITCS 3690. May be repeated for credit. (On demand)
ITCS 3695. Computer Science Cooperative Education Seminar. (1)  Required of Co-op students immediately following each work assignment for presentation of reports on work done the prior semester.  (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ITCS 3699. Senior Seminar. (1-3) Prerequisites: Senior standing and permission of department. Each participant will prepare a lecture on a topic in computer science. Emphasis will be on communication of technical information as well as on content of the presentations. May be repeated for credit. (On demand)
ITCS 4010. Topics in Computer Science. (1-3) Prerequisite: Permission of department. Topics in computer science selected to supplement the regular course offerings at the 4000 level. May be repeated for credit with permission of department.  (Additionally, a student may register for multiple sections of the course with different topics in the same semester or in different semesters.) (On demand)
ITCS 4102. Programming Languages. (3) Prerequisite: ITCS 2215.  Formal definition of programming languages, including specification of syntax and semantics. Evolution of programming languages and language design principles. Structural organization, control structures, data structures and types, name visibility, binding times, parameter passing modes, subroutines, co-routines, and tasks. Functional programming, list processing, logic programming, object-oriented programming systems. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
ITCS 4107. Formal Languages and Automata. (3) Prerequisite: MATH 1165 or ITCS 2175.  Detailed study of abstract models for the syntax of programming languages and information processing devices. Languages and their representation; grammars, finite automata and regular sets; context-free grammars and pushdown automata; Chomsky Hierarchy; closure properties of families of languages; syntax analysis. (On demand)
ITCS 4120. Introduction to Computer Graphics. (3)  Prerequisites:  ITCS 2214 and MATH 2164 or permission of department.  Graphics hardware; raster algorithms; geometric transformations; 2D/3D interactive graphics; 3D viewing and perspective projections; color and lighting models; hidden surface removal; modeling hierarchies; fractals; curved surfaces.  (Fall) (Evenings)
ITCS 4121. Information Visualization. (3) Prerequisites: ITCS 1213 and 1213L or approval of the instructor.  Information visualization concepts, theories, design principles, popular techniques, evaluation methods, and information visualization applications. (Spring) (Evenings)
ITCS 4122. Visual Analytics. (3) Prerequisite: STAT 1220, STAT 1221, STAT 1222, STAT 2122, or STAT 2223, or approval of the instructor.  Introduces the new field of visual analytics, which provides tools for the interactive visual analysis of large and complex data sets in many application areas. Topics include: visual representation, perception, the analysis process, critical thinking, data transformations, color, interaction, and applications. (Fall) (Evenings)
ITCS 4123. Visualization and Visual Communication. (3)  Understanding the relatively technical field of visualization from the point of view of visual communication; this course draws connections with photography, design, illustration, aesthetics, and art.  Both technical and theoretical aspects of the various fields are covered, and the connections between them are investigated. (Spring) (Evenings)
ITCS 4128. Programming Languages and Compilers. (3)  Prerequisite: ITCS 2214.  Introduction to the concepts and techniques used in describing, defining, and implementing programming languages and their compilers.  Introduction to parsing and parser construction; LL and LR grammars; syntax directed translation; data object representations; run time structures; intermediate languages; code optimization. (On demand)
ITCS 4131. Communication Network Design. (3)  Prerequisites: ITCS 3166 or permission of department.  Emphasis on the design and analysis of communication networks. Application, host, and network requirements analysis; data flow analysis, models and specifications; technology choices; Interconnection mechanisms; network management and security; physical network design; addressing and routing. (On demand)
ITCS 4133. Numerical Computation Methods and Analysis. (3) Prerequisites: ITCS 2214; and MATH 1120 or MATH 1241.  Introduction to principles and techniques behind numerical methods and algorithms that underlie modern scientific and engineering applications. Roots of equations: linear systems (direct methods, LU/QR factorization, iterative methods); Eigen values and vectors; Interpolation, Approximation; Numerical Differentiation/Integration, ODEs and PDEs. (On demand)
ITCS 4141. Computer Organization and Architecture.  (3)  Prerequisite: ITCS 3181 and ITCS 3182, or equivalents.  Fundamentals of computer design; instruction set design, basic processor implementation techniques; pipelining; memory hierarchy; Input/Output.  Cost/performance and hardware/software trade-offs.  (On demand)
ITCS 4145. Parallel Computing. (3)  Prerequisites:  ITCS 2214; and ITCS 3181 or ITCS 3182.  Types of parallel computers, programming techniques for multiprocessor and multicomputer systems, parallel strategies, algorithms, and languages.  (Once every three semesters) (Evenings)
ITCS 4146. Grid Computing. (3)  Prerequisites: ITCS 1213 and ITCS 1213L. Grid computing software components, standards, web services, security mechanisms, schedulers and resource brokers, workflow editors, grid portals, grid computing applications. (Once every three semesters)
ITCS 4151. Intelligent Robotics. (3) Prerequisites:  ITCS 2214 and MATH 2164. General introduction to spatial descriptions and transformations, and manipulator position and motion. More study on robot planning, programming, sensing, vision, and CAD/CAM. (On demand)
ITCS 4152. Computer Vision. (3)  Prerequisites: ITCS 2215 and MATH 2164.  General introduction to computer vision and its application.  Topics include: low level vision, 2D and 3D segmentation, 2D description, 2D recognition, 3D description and model-based recognition, and interpretation. (Spring) (Odd years)
ITCS 4155. Software Development Projects. (3)  Prerequisites: ITCS 2215; ITCS 3155, ITIS 3300, ITIS 3310, or permission of instructor; and Senior Standing or permission of department.  Advanced software engineering concepts.  Explores the entire software development process, emphasizing requirements engineering, design, implementation, test, deployment, and evolution.  Advanced topics in software engineering, such as object-oriented modeling, software architecture, architectural styles, design patterns, middleware frameworks, and programming paradigms.  Students apply these concepts, along with concepts from introductory programming courses, data structures and algorithms courses, and introductory software engineering courses, to a team software development project that results in an executable software system prototype. (Spring)
ITCS 4157. Computer-Aided Instruction. (3)  Prerequisite: Permission of department.  History of CAI; study of current CAI systems; development of man-machine dialogue; programming tools for CAI; information structures for computer-oriented learning.  Advantages/disadvantages/costs of CAI. (On demand)
ITCS 4161. Intellectual Property Aspects of Computing. (3) Prerequisite: Senior standing or permission of department. This course explores the broad field of intellectual property and the many aspects related to computing. Topics covered include software copyrights, software patents, trademarks and service marks, employment contracts, non-compete agreements, software licenses, software development contracts, preservation of digital evidence, protection of trade secrets, cyberspace law and the use of mediation in IP disputes. (Spring)
ITCS 4180. Mobile Application Development. (3)  Cross-listed as ITIS 4180.  Prerequisite: ITCS 2214 or permission of department.  Mobile platforms are at the center of attention of users and organizations nowadays.  Most organizations and businesses are rapidly migrating toward the cloud and need to provide a fast and easy mechanism for users to stay connected to their services.  Mobile applications are the top trend nowadays given the high variety of new mobile devices and platforms such as Apple’s iOS and Google’s Android.  In this course, students are introduced to the foundations of mobile development and its unique requirements and constraints.  Students design and build a variety of mobile applications with a hands-on and project-based approach. (On demand)
ITCS 4181. Microcomputer Interfacing. (3) Prerequisite: ITCS 3181, ITCS 3182, ECGR 3181, or permission of department. Signal conditioning, A/D conversion, noise, transmission line effects, signal processing, D/A conversion and serial/parallel interfaces. (On demand)
ITCS 4230. Introduction to Game Design and Development. (3) Prerequisite: ITCS 2215. Basic concepts and techniques for electronic game design and development. Topics include: game history and genres, game design teams and processes, what makes a game fun, level and model design, game scripting and programming including computer graphics and animation, artificial intelligence, industry issues, and gender and games. (Fall)
ITCS 4231. Advanced Game Design and Development. (3)  Prerequisite: ITCS 4230.  Advanced concepts and techniques for electronic game design and development.  A project-centered course where students explore complex gameplay and interactivity.  Eplores topics from the introductory course in more depth, such as: applying software engineering techniques to developing games, advanced game programming and scripting, networking, graphics, physics, audio, game data structures and algorithms, and artificial intelligence. (Spring)
ITCS 4232. Game Design and Development Studio. (3)  Prerequisite: ITCS 3155, ITCS 4120, ITCS 4231, and one approved game elective, or permission of instructor; and Senior standing or permission of department.  Application of advanced concepts and techniques for electronic game design and development.  Teams use engineering techniques to incorporate game programming and scripting, networking, graphics, physics, audio, game data structures and algorithms, and artificial intelligence into an electronic game.  Individuals develop a complete portfolio of prior work and the course project. (Spring) (Evenings)
ITCS 4235. Game Engine Construction. (3)  Prerequisite: ITCS 4120 or permission of department.  Introduction to principles and techniques behind modern computer and console game engines. Graphics Rendering Pipeline (transformations, lighting, shading); 2D/3D Texture Mapping; Image Based Rendering; Spatial Structures and Acceleration Algorithms; Level of Detail; Collision Detection, Culling and Intersection Methods; Vertex/Pixel Shaders; Pipeline Optimization; Rendering Hardware. (On demand)
ITCS 4236. Artificial Intelligence for Computer Games. (3)  Prerequisite: ITCS 3153.  Application of advanced concepts and techniques in artificial intelligence for electronic game design and development.  An investigation of the artificial intelligence techniques necessary for an agent to act, or appear to act, intelligently in interactive virtual worlds.  Topics include: uncertainty reasoning, machine learning, perception, knowledge representation, search, and planning.  Emphasis is on implementation and experimentation with the goal of building robust intelligent agents in interactive entertainment domains.  Elements of multi-agent collaboration and the use of cognitive architectures in interactive computer games are also discussed. (On demand)
ITCS 4237. Audio Processing for Entertainment Computing. (3) Prerequisite: MATH 1242, MATH 2164, and ITCS 2215 or equivalents. Introduction to the principles and applications of audio (digital signal) processing focusing on entertainment domains.  Topics include: analysis of signals, transforms, digital filter design techniques, audio engine development, file encoding/decoding, spatial sound rendering, optimization, and advanced audio techniques. (On demand)
ITCS 4490. Professional Internship. (0-6)  Cross-listed as ITIS 4490.  Prerequisite: Department approval.  Full- or part-time academic year internship in areas complementary to the concentration area of studies and designed to allow theoretical and course-based practical learning to be applied in a supervised industrial experience.  Each student’s internship program must be approved by the supervising faculty.  A mid-term report and a final report to be evaluated by the supervising faculty are required.  Grading by the supervising faculty in consultation with off-campus supervisor at the internship organization.  May be repeated but a maximum of six credit hours only may be used to meet a major requirement such as a major elective.  Any credit above the maximum of six hours may only be used as free electives. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ITCS 4640. Financial Services Informatics Industry Foundations Capstone I. (3)  Cross-listed as ITIS 4640. Prerequisite: Senior standing. An individual or group project in the theory, teaching, or application of Financial Services Informatics under the direction of a faculty member.  Projects must be approved before they may be initiated. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
ITCS 4641. Financial Services Informatics Industry Foundations Capstone II. (3)  Cross-listed as ITIS 4641. Prerequisite: ITCS/ITIS 4640. A continuation of ITCS/ITIS 4640. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
ITCS 4650. Senior Project I. (3)  Prerequisites: Senior standing and two ITCS/ITIS 3xxx/4xxx courses with grades of C or above, or permission of department.  An individual or group project in the teaching, theory, or application of computer science under the direction of a faculty member.  Projects must be approved by the department before they can be initiated. (Fall, Spring) (Evenings)
ITCS 4651. Senior Project II. (3)  Prerequisite: ITCS 4650.  A continuation of ITCS 4650. (Fall, Spring) (Evenings)
ITCS 4681. Senior Design I. (3)  Prerequisites: Senior standing and two ITCS/ITIS 3xxx/4xxx courses with grades of C or above, or permission of department.  An individual or group computer engineering design project under the direction of a faculty member. Projects must be approved by the department before they can be initiated. (Fall, Spring) (Evenings)
ITCS 4682. Senior Design II. (3)  Prerequisite: ITCS 4681.  A continuation of ITCS 4681. (Fall, Spring) (Evenings)
ITCS 4990. Undergraduate Research. (3)  Prerequisite: Permission of department.  Undergraduate research as part of a joint undergraduate/graduate research project using existing research laboratory facilities and materials.  May be repeated for credit up to 6 credits.  (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ITCS 4991. Undergraduate Thesis. (3)  Prerequisites: ITCS 4155, ITCS 4232, ITCS 4650, ITCS 4681, or ITCS 4990; permission of department; and, when taken for honors credit, approval of a proposal through the Honors College Application to Candidacy process the semester prior to taking the course.  Students explore a subject in computer science chosen for thesis research and present a written thesis to their thesis committee consisting of the thesis advisor and at least two other faculty members. (Fall, Spring)
ITIS 1102. Advanced Internet Concepts. (3)  Cross-listed as ITCS 1102.  Prerequisite: ITCS 1101 or permission of department.  Advanced study of the Internet environment.  Designed for any student who is familiar with office productivity tools and a user of Internet technologies; it addresses advanced concepts of computer literacy.  Topics include: concepts of website design and how to evaluate websites; proper use of synchronous and asynchronous communication tools (e.g., chat, email, IM); issues of copyright and cyber-ethics; using the Internet to do research; and publishing via the Internet.  Other topics may be added to keep the content current and relevant.  Students complete extensive Internet-oriented projects to demonstrate mastery of the skills discussed in class.  May not be taken for credit by ITIS majors. (Fall, Spring) (Online)
ITIS 1200. Freshman Seminar. (3)  Prerequisite:  Permission of department.  An introductory Information Technology course designed to assist students with the transition to college by acquainting them with the University’s resources and support, exploring opportunities in the IT field, and developing a strong sense of community within the College of Computing and Informatics and the University as a whole.  The development of learning skills, time management skills, and other life skills necessary for college success will be emphasized.  (Fall)
ITIS 1203. Survey of Computing. (3)  Cross-listed as ITCS 1203.  Introductory course that explores the broad field of computing as it applies to daily life. Topics cover computers of all sizes from handheld devices to super computers; the role of software from operating systems to applications; the software development process; issues of security and privacy on the Internet and the World Wide Web; and possible fields of study within the broad field of information technology. (Fall, Spring)
ITIS 1210. Introduction to Web-Based Information Systems. (3)  Introductory course in developing Web pages for both majors and non-majors. Topics include: an introduction to the mechanisms by which the Internet and the World Wide Web operate, general concepts related to Web-based information systems, the design and construction of Web infrastructure including authoring tools, domain registration, legal and ethical considerations, and basic Web security. (Fall, Spring) (Evenings)
ITIS 1301. Introduction to the Financial Services Industry. (3)  Cross-listed as ITCS 1301.  An overview of the financial services industry, including such areas as the industry components; regulatory considerations and their impact; and relations with other institutions. (Fall, Summer) (Evenings)
ITIS 1350. eScience. (4) Corequisite: ITIS 1350L. This course introduces the application of computational methods to scientific exploration and discovery in the natural sciences. Examples include modeling the spread of viruses, predator-prey relationship, the carbon cycle, and fish schooling. Both theory and practice of computational simulation and modeling techniques are examined as tools to support the scientific method. No computer programming knowledge is required. The course grade includes the student’s performance in ITIS 1350L. Must be taken concurrently with ITIS 1350L. (Fall, Spring)
ITIS 1350L. eScience Laboratory. (0) Corequisite: ITIS 1350. Laboratory exercises that introduce computational tools and techniques that support scientific exploration and discovery in the natural sciences. One three hour laboratory per week. No programming experience is required. Performance in ITIS 1350L will be counted as a portion of the ITIS 1350 grade. Must be taken concurrently with ITIS 1350. Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis. (Fall, Spring)
ITIS 1600. Computing Professionals. (1)  Cross-listed as ITCS 1600.  This required course should be taken by all Freshman and Transfer students during their first semester in the College of Computing and Informatics.  It is designed to assist with the intellectual and social transition from high school or community college to university by increasing the involvement of students in the intellectual life on campus and within the professional computing community; providing an orientation to resources available to students; promoting oral and writing skills; and enabling students to develop a personal education plan.  The course has three components: a seminar series, peer group engagement, and extra-curricular engagement.  Course grades are based on participation in all three components, quality of written reflections on all three components, and peer and instructor review of individual performance in peer group engagement activities, including the development of a personal education plan.  May not be repeated for grade replacement.  (Fall, Spring)
ITIS 2110. IT Infrastructure I: Design and Practice. (3)  Prerequisite: Sophomore standing or permission of department. Corequisite: ITIS 2110L. This course covers basics concepts for IT infrastructure systems administration such as networking administration (e.g., DNS configuration, router configuration, firewall setup, and web server configurations), operating system administration (e.g., account and privilege management, and service management). The course grade includes the student’s performance in ITIS 2110L. (Fall, Spring)
ITIS 2110L. IT Infrastructure I: Design and Practice Lab. (0) Corequisite: ITIS 2110. Guided laboratory exercises dealing with IT Infrastructure concepts and equipment. Performance in ITIS 2110L will be counted as portion of the ITIS 2110 grade. Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis.  (Fall, Spring)
ITIS 2211. Ethical Issues in Personal, Professional, and Public Life: Technology. (3)  Open to CCI majors only.  An analysis of the conceptual tools needed to make informed, responsible judgments based on the ability to think critically and knowledgeably about issues of personal, professional, and public ethics and morality. The study of a variety of ethical views and ethical issues. Successful completion of the course satisfies the LBST 2211 requirement for General Education. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
ITIS 2300. Web-Based Application Development. (3)  Prerequisite:  Sophomore standing or permission of department.  Basic concepts for developing interactive web based applications; HTML, client side scripting, server side scripting, user interface design considerations, information security and privacy considerations, system integration considerations. Students will be required to develop working prototypes of web-based applications. (Fall, Spring)
ITIS 2301. Financial Services Computing Environment. (3) Cross-listed as ITCS 2301. Prerequisite: ITCS/ITIS 1301. The objective is for the student to gain insights on several key components in financial computing environments and the enabling technologies. (Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
ITIS 3100. Introduction to IT Infrastructure Systems. (3)  Prerequisite: ITIS 2300.  The methodologies, tools, and technologies that are important for understanding various IT infrastructure systems such as file storage services, email services, and web services.  Focus placed on understanding widely-used network infrastructure services and systems, and acquiring basic knowledge in design practices and management of such systems. Can serve as a prerequisite course for ITIS 3200 and ITIS 4220. (Fall, Spring) (Evenings)
ITIS 3105. Server-Side Applications and Data Management. (3)  Prerequisites: ITIS 2300 and ITCS 1213, or permission of department. This course covers principles that are important for implementing advanced Web-based applications. Emphasis will be placed on industrial and business applications which require robust and secure implementations. Server-side scripting and processing techniques will be exercised in course projects. (Spring)
ITIS 3106. Structured System Analysis and Design. (3) Prerequisite: ITCS 1213 or permission of department. Structured systems development. Strategies and techniques of structured analysis and structured design to produce logical methodologies for dealing with complexity in the development of information systems. (Summer) (Evenings)
ITIS 3110. IT Infrastructure II: Design and Practice. (3)  Prerequisites: ITIS 2110 and ITIS 2110L or permission of department.  Corequisite: ITIS 3110L.  The concepts for the design and implementation of robust IT infrastructures.  Topics include:  system hardening, secured access, penetration testing, file storage services, as well as advanced topics in design and configuration of network based services.  Course grade includes the student’s performance in ITIS 3110L. (Fall, Spring)
ITIS 3110L. IT Infrastructure II: Design and Practice Lab. (0) Corequisite: ITIS 3110. Guided laboratory exercises dealing with IT Infrastructure concepts and equipment. Performance in ITIS 3110L will be counted as portion of the ITIS 3110 grade.  Graded on a Pass/No Credit basis.  (Fall, Spring)
ITIS 3130. Human-Computer Interaction. (3) Prerequisite: Sophomore standing.  Concepts of the design of the human-machine environment, with special emphasis on human-computer interaction and how people acquire, store, and use data from the environment and from computers. Topics include: analysis, creation and improvement of equipment and environment to make them compatible with human capabilities and expectation; analysis of existing equipment with respect to user usability and interfacing capabilities. (Fall) (Evenings)
ITIS 3131. Human and Computer Information Processing. (3)  Prerequisite: ITIS 2300 or permission of department.  Overview of methods people use to acquire, store, and use the data they receive from the environment and their implementation of computers. Topics include: perception, pattern recognition, attention, memory, knowledge representation, language, and problem solving. (On demand)
ITIS 3132. Information Systems. (3)  Prerequisite: ITIS 2300 or permission of department.  Analysis, design, implementation, and evaluation of information systems. Topics include: techniques of manipulating data; behavioral component of dealing with the user and integration of technology, procedures, and people. (On demand)
ITIS 3150. Rapid Prototyping and Interface Building. (3)  Prerequisite: Sophomore standing. Students will learn various ways to rapidly prototype interface design ideas. This course will teach the theory behind rapid prototyping and how it relates to Human-Computer Interaction. Students will study low fidelity prototyping methods such as FIDO design and paper prototyping, and then move into higher fidelity prototyping methods such as throwaway digital prototyping. Evolutionary prototyping, interface building using high-level programming languages, will be covered. In addition to software prototyping, students will also perform blank model prototyping for physical devices. (On demand)
ITIS 3200. Introduction to Information Security and Privacy. (3) Prerequisite: ITCS 1213 or permission of department. This courses provides an introductory overview of key issues and solutions for information security and privacy. Topics include: security concepts and mechanisms; security technologies; authentication mechanisms; mandatory and discretionary controls; basic cryptography and its applications; intrusion detection and prevention; information systems assurance; anonymity and privacy issues for information systems.
ITIS 3300. Software Requirements and Project Management. (3) Prerequisite: ITIS 2300 or permission of department.  Introduction to requirement engineering and project management methodologies.  Topics include: requirements elicitation, specification, and validation; structural, informational, behavioral, security, privacy, and computer user interface requirements; scenario analysis; application of object-oriented methodologies in requirements gathering; spiral development model; risk management models; software engineering maturity model; project planning and milestones; cost estimation; team organizations and behavior. Case studies will be used. (On demand)
ITIS 3301. Introduction to the Regulatory Environment for Financial Services Firms. (3)  Cross-listed as ITCS 3301.  Prerequisite: ITCS 2301 or ITIS 2301.  Using case studies, understand the compliance and regulatory environment that currently exists for Financial Services firms. (Fall, Summer) (Evenings)
ITIS 3310. Software Architecture and Design. (3)  Prerequisite: ITCS 2214 or permission of department. Introduction to software design with emphasis on architectural design and design patterns.  Models of software architecture.  Architecture styles and patterns, including explicit, event-driven, client-server, and middleware architectures. Decomposition and composition of architectural components and interactions.  Use of non-functional requirements for tradeoff analysis. Component based software development, deployment and management. A system design language, such as UML, are introduced and used throughout the course.
ITIS 3320. Introduction to Software Testing and Assurance. (3)  Prerequisites: ITIS 3200 and ITIS 3300 or permission of department.  Methods of evaluating software for correctness, and reliability including code inspections, program proofs and testing methodologies.  Formal and informal proofs of correctness.  Code inspections and their role in software verification.  Unit and system testing techniques, testing tools and limitations of testing. Statistical resting, reliability models. (Fall, Spring) (Evenings)
ITIS 3590. Software and Information Systems Cooperative Education and 49ership Experience.  (0) This course is required of Co-op and 49ership/service 49ership students during the semester they are working.  Acceptance into the Experiential Learning Program is required.  Participating students pay a course registration fee for transcript notation.  Assignments must be arranged and approved in advance.  Course may be repeated.  Graded on a Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory basis.  Only open to undergraduate students; graduate level students are encouraged to contact their academic departments to inquire about academic or industrial internship options for credit.  For more information, contact the University Career Center.  (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ITIS 3650. Senior Project I. (3)  Prerequisites: Senior standing and two ITCS/ITIS 3xxx/4xxx courses with grade of C or above, or permission of department.  An individual or group project in the teaching, theory, or application of software and information systems under the direction of a faculty member.  Projects must be approved by the department before they may be initiated. (Fall, Spring) (Evenings)
ITIS 3651. Senior Project II. (3)  Prerequisite: ITIS 3650. A continuation of ITIS 3650. (Fall, Spring) (Evenings)
ITIS 3695. Software and Information Systems Cooperative Education Seminar. (1)  Required of Co-op students immediately following each work assignment for presentation of reports on work done the prior semester.  (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ITIS 4166. Network-Based Application Development. (3)  Prerequisites:  ITIS 2300 and ITCS 2214.  Examines the issues related to network based application development.  Topics include: introduction to computer networks, web technologies and standards, network based programming methodologies, languages, tools and standards.  (Fall, Spring) (Evenings)
ITIS 4170. Advanced Client Applications. (3) Prerequisites: ITIS 2300 and ITCS 2214.  The theory and practice of techniques to develop Web applications that have the features and functionality of traditional desktop applications, dealing with the browser as graphical user interface and the Internet as platform, with attention to interactivity, speed, functionality, and usability. Technologies covered include: X/D/HTML, DOM, CSS, and client-side scripting for layout and formatting, data interaction formats such as XML and JSON, and asynchronous server interaction with client-side scripting and XML (AJAX). The course will examine emerging frameworks for development support, as well as typical applications such as mapping "mashups," folksonomies, and social networking. (Spring)
ITIS 4180. Mobile Application Development. (3)  Cross-listed as ITCS 4180.  Prerequisite: ITCS 2214 or permission of department.  Mobile platforms are at the center of attention of users and organizations nowadays.  Most organizations and businesses are rapidly migrating toward the cloud and need to provide a fast and easy mechanism for users to stay connected to their services.  Mobile applications are the top trend nowadays given the high variety of new mobile devices and platforms such as Apple’s iOS and Google’s Android.  In this course, students are introduced to the foundations of mobile development and its unique requirements and constraints.  Students design and build a variety of mobile applications with a hands-on and project-based approach. (On demand)
ITIS 4220. Vulnerability Assessment and Systems Assurance. (3)  Prerequisite:  ITIS 3200 or permission of department.  Methodologies, tools, and technologies that are important for vulnerability assessment and systems assurance.  Topics include:  ethical hacking techniques, vulnerability assessment, risk assessment/management, finding new exploits, discovering vulnerabilities, penetrating network perimeters, bypassing auditing systems, and assured administration of systems as well as evaluating systems assurance levels.  Focus placed on:  1) understanding current penetration techniques for networks, operating systems, services and applications; 2) investigating mitigation and defense strategies; and 3) studying legal and ethical considerations.  Based on case studies with a strong lab component.  (Fall, Spring)
ITIS 4221. Secure Programming and Penetration Testing. (3)  Prerequisite: ITIS 4166 or permission of department.  Techniques for web application penetration testing, secure software development techniques for network based applications.  Automated approaches such as static code analysis and application scanning are also discussed. (On demand)
ITIS 4250. Computer Forensics. (3)  Prerequisites:  ITIS 2300 or permission of department.  The identification, extraction, documentation, interpretation, and preservation  of computer media for evidentiary purposes and/or root cause analysis.  Topics include: techniques for discovering digital evidence; responding to electronic incidents; tracking communications through networks; understanding electronic media, crypto-literacy, data hiding, hostile code and Windows™ and UNIX™ system forensics; and the role of forensics in the digital environment.  (On demand)
ITIS 4490. Professional Internship. (0-6)  Cross-listed as ITIS 4490.  Prerequisite: Department approval.  Full or part-time academic year internship in areas complementary to the concentration area of studies and designed to allow theoretical and course-based practical learning to be applied in a supervised industrial experience.  Each student’s internship program must be approved by the supervising faculty. A mid-term report and a final report to be evaluated by the supervising faculty are required.  Grading will be by the supervising faculty in consultation with off-campus supervisor at the internship organization.  May be repeated but a maximum of six credit hours only may be used to meet a major requirement such as a major elective.  Any credit above the maximum of six hours may only be used as free electives. (Fall, Spring, Summer)
ITIS 4510. Web Mining. (3)  Pre- or corequisite:  ITCS 3160 or permission of department.  Topics include:  measuring and modeling the Web; crawling, Web search and information retrieval; unsupervised learning, supervised learning, semi-supervised learning in Web context; social network analysis and hyperlink analysis; text parsing and knowledge representation.  (Spring)
ITIS 4640. Financial Services Informatics Industry Foundations Capstone I. (3)  Cross-listed as ITCS 4640. Prerequisite: Senior standing.  An individual or group project in the theory, teaching, or application of Financial Services Informatics under the direction of a faculty member.  Projects must be approved before they may be initiated. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
ITIS 4641. Financial Services Informatics Industry Foundations Capstone II. (3)  Cross-listed as ITCS 4641. Prerequisite: ITCS 4640 or ITIS 4640.  A continuation of ITCS/ITIS 4640. (Fall, Spring, Summer) (Evenings)
ITIS 4990. Undergraduate Research. (3)  Prerequisite: Permission of department.  Undergraduate research under the supervision and direction of a faculty member.  May be repeated for credit up to 6 credits.  (On demand)